                 Published by STEMMADEFun
            Printed in the United States of America.
   For permission requests, write to the publisher, addressed
  “Attention: Permissions Coordinator,” at the address below.
                        4127 Bay Street,
                  Fremont, California, 94539
                   stemmadefun@gmail.com



Stem Made Fun's Purpose
Our mission at STEMMadeFun is to empower individuals with learning
disabilities or underprivileged to reach their full potential in the fields of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics through accessible
and inclusive learning experiences that make STEM education fun and
meaningful.
We have made this book to provide universal access to an educational
and entertaining journey through the world of STEM. This book, is a result
of countless hours of dedication from our team of passionate educators,
scientists, and designers. Our goal is to inspire curiosity, ignite a love for
learning, and instill confidence in every reader, regardless of their
background or abilities.
We take readers on a captivating expedition, exploring various scientific
concepts and phenomena in a way that is engaging, interactive, and
inclusive. The book is carefully designed to cater to different learning
styles, ensuring that each reader can fully participate and absorb the
knowledge within.
From the first page to the last, the book is bursting with vibrant
illustrations, captivating stories, and hands-on experiments that bring
STEM to life. Each chapter focuses on a specific scientific discipline, such
as physics, biology, chemistry, or engineering, and presents the
information in a fun and accessible manner.
Throughout the book, readers will find intriguing puzzles, quizzes, and
activities that reinforce the concepts they have learned. These interactive
elements encourage active participation and critical thinking, making the
learning process enjoyable and memorable.




  I                   TABLE OF CONTENTS
 ABOUT THE AUTHORS

                             Aashrith Bandaru
                                 Founder

     Hello, I am Aashrith Bandaru. I'm an advocate for STEM education
and an entrepreneurial leader from Fremont, California. Coming from
the Bay Area, a place filled with technology and innovation, I have a
deep interest in the intersection of data science and business. I started
my STEM journey learning programming for web development and then
expanded to Python and Java. After gaining substantial knowledge, I
began teaching classes with GATE and continued deepening my
understanding by focusing on data science, completing numerous
Udemy courses in this field. Eventually, I became the president of the
Data Science Club at Irvington High School.

II
 ABOUT THE AUTHORS

                              Krishiv Aggarwal
                                  Founder

       Hi I am Krishiv, from Fremont, California, with a strong interest in
the fields of computers and engineering. Growing up in Silicon Valley
with parents who hold master's degrees in STEM fields has provided me
with extensive exposure to subjects relating to robotics and sciences
and encouraged me to pursue knowledge in programming languages
such as Python, web development (HTML, CSS, JavaScript), and C.
    In addition to my academic pursuits, I am also dedicated to giving
back to the community. I am the founder of STEM Made Fun (SMF), a
nonprofit organization that brings STEM education to underprivileged
and underrepresented communities. We host sessions in local schools
where they don't have access to after-school programs and for
disadvantaged girls in Noida, India. Our goal is to provide students
without access to the same resources and opportunities we are
fortunate to have growing up in Silicon Valley.



  III                
  ABOUT THE AUTHORS
CONTRIBUTERS
 Aariv A.      Anish J.     Arnav S.
Justin L.     Karthik N. Karthik S.
Prithvi M. Pratyush M.          Riti N.
Rohith B. Saaeesh N.            Sai P.

Sathvik L.     Sreyas Y.        Shaan P.

Sujith S.      Tanuj K.         Varun C.

V           ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Page Intentionally left blank
  EXPERIENCE
   THE FORCE
              LIFT




DRAG                 THRUST




           GRAVITY




        CHECK OUT
       OUR YOUTUBE
        CHANNEL!
           1.1 GRAVITY
What are forces and why do they matter?

                         Questions of
                         the day:
                        Why does an apple fall down from an
                        apple tree?

                        Why does a ball always come back
                        down after being thrown up?

                        Why do I fall back down when I jump?




  KEY WORDS
   Gravity
   Attraction
   Friction
   Weight
   Mass
   Force
   Apple
   Gravitational
   field




                   1.1 GRAVITY                             2
         INTRO TO GRAVITY
      Gravity                       Gravity is defined as the force of attraction
                                    between two objects. All objects on Earth
                                    are attracted to Earth's center because of
                                    gravity. For example, when a ball is thrown
                                    up it comes back down because of its
                                    attraction to the earth's center. When an
                                    apple falls off a tree, it falls to the ground
                                    due to gravity.
                                    Every object has a gravitational force,
                                    however, it is proportional to its mass.
 Try throwing a tennis ball
up. It will always come back
                                    Objects with a larger mass have a more
    down due to gravity.            significant force of attraction.



              How Does Mass Affect Gravity?
    Now, you might be wondering, what is mass? Mass is the amount of
    matter in a physical object. Objects with large amounts of mass like
    the sun, have stronger gravitational fields and are able to keep
    planets in orbit.


                                                  9.8 m/s^2 (unit              Human Mass:
                                                    of gravity)                   60 kg
                                                       down
                                                                       Earth Mass:
                                                                    5.972 × 10^24 kg




                                                   The Earth is very large compared to a human
        Fun Fact: The Sun's gravity has an            being with a mass of 5.972 × 10^24 kg
    attractive force that is so strong it keeps   compared to a human's average mass of 60 kg
         the entire solar system in orbit!                         (130 pounds).




  3                                   1.1 GRAVITY
  MASS AND WEIGHT



Try dropping a baseball and tennis ball at the same time. Record
the time the objects hit the ground. Visually these objects are
roughly the same in size but are made from different materials
and therefore have different masses. Your initial assumption may
be that the baseball will hit the ground first due to a larger mass..
However, the mass of an object does not affect when the ball hits
the ground. The force of gravity creates constant acceleration for
both objects resulting in both balls hitting the ground at the same
time.



   Mass VS Weight
                  Mass is the measure of how much matter is in
                  an object. For example, a filled water bottle
                  would have a greater mass than an empty
                  water bottle because there are more particles
                  inside of it.

                  Weight is the measure of gravitational force on
                  an object. On most regions of Earth, the weight
                  and mass of an object are the same, but for
                  planets like Mercury with a lighter gravitational
                  force, the weight would be much less than the
                  mass.



                        1.1 GRAVITY                                   4
     WHY DO WE CARE
     ABOUT "GRAVITY"
 Have you ever thought of how beautiful
 the nature around us is? Well, then you
 have to thank Gravity. The only reason
 raindrops fall to the ground is gravity
 pulling them down. The only reason why
 plants can survive is due to the rain. The
 soil stays in the ground (most of it) and
 does not fly away when the wind comes
 due to gravity.




                        The playground is also full of gravity. Have
                        you ever gone down a slide before? Well, how
                        do you go down, Gravity? Whenever you
                        throw a ball, it comes down because of,
                        Gravity. The only reason you come down on a
                        slide is due to gravity Gravity. When you are
                        playing on the swings, the reason why you do
                        not start flying is because of Gravity.



Have you ever been to a beach and seen
waves crashing against the beach shore?
Well believe it or not, there is a high chance
those waves are caused by the gravity of
the moon and the sun. As the Earth spins,
some of the water is pulled by the gravity of
the sun and moon and causes it to rise as a
wave. Pretty cool right?




5                         1.1 GRAVITY
FINDING WEIGHT ON
DIFFERENT PLANETS

      The Astronaut's Dilemna
                After being stranded in space our astronaut
                has to land on a new planet. Before landing
                on another planet, however, the astronaut
               has to figure out his weight. Without knowing
                  his weight, his movement can be varied
                dependent on his weight on a planet. If the
               astronaut weighs 150 lbs on Earth, how much
                does the astronaut weigh on other planets?



  Divide the
 weight of the            Multiply by
                          acceleration         Obtain Value for
 astronaut on
                          of gravity of         Weight on the
earth by Earth's
                           the planet            new Planet!
  gravity (9.8
    m/s^2)




   Saturn                    Earth                 Mars
                          9.8 m/s^2              3.7 m/s^2
 10.4 m/s^2

                      1.1 GRAVITY                              6
THOUGHT PROVOKING
      What would hit the ground first?




    A bullet dropped from 1 meter above the ground or
    a bullet shot from a gun 1 meter off the ground?



                             All of the planets in the
                             solar system have gravity,
                             so why do they not pull
                             each other all together
                             into a ball?




             Does speed stay constant
             when a car is taking a turn or
             driving alongside a curve?




7                   1.1 GRAVITY
     1.2 FRICTION + AIR
 What is friction and why is it important?

                Questions of the day
                 Why do different sports use different types
                 of shoes? For example, why do soccer cleats
                 have protruding stumps?


  Why do you slip more in slippers compared
  to tennis shoes.

    How do different shoe grips affect your
    movement? What about surface materials?




  Key words
  Friction
  Air
  Wind
  Boat
  Coefficient
  Wood
  Plane
  Resistance
  Traction




                   1.2 FRICTION + AIR                          8
By. XXX
      WHAT IS FRICTION
By definition, friction is a force that opposes the motion of two objects
that are in contact. It exists in different forms, like kinetic friction,
static friction, fluid friction, and rolling friction. Since friction is a
force, it is measured in Newtons (N). Friction varies based on how
rough the surface is. In the real world, friction has many applications
like providing traction for shoes, which is helpful for sports, preventing
sliding, etc.




Friction Force                                  Velocity


             Important Definitions
 Friction: the force that opposes
 the motion of two objects in
 contact.
 Normal Force: the force that a
 surface exerts on an object that is
 on top of it.
 Friction Coefficient: a
 measurement of how much
 friction exists between two
 surfaces.
 Traction: the ability to stay on a
 surface without sliding.
 Air Resistance: the friction force     Air Resistance
 between an object and the air.




9                     1.2 FRICTION + AIR
      USES OF FRICTION
Engineering
When engineers are designing
machines and objects like cars
and road surfaces, they rely on
and account for a frictional force.
For example, friction is used to
help the car slow down and stop
when a driver hits the brakes.




                               Sports Gear
                               Friction is also utilized in sports gear
                               in order to increase traction and
                               improve performance. For example,
                               sports shoes are crafted to provide an
                               appropriate amount of friction/grip to
                               minimize sliding.




  Medical Devices
 Friction is also used to improve the use
 of medical devices. For example, it may
 be used in surgical instruments to
 improve grip with flesh and organs in
 order to facilitate surgery and ensure
 that it is successful.




                      1.2 FRICTION + AIR                            10
         WHAT AFFECTS
           FRICTION
     Normal Force
The normal force is the upward force that
the ground exerts on a solid object and
prevents the objects. The normal force
also affects friction and has a direct
relation to the friction force between the
object and the surface. When normal
force increases, the frictional force also
increases.


                                             Material
                                     The type of material that an
                                     object is made with will most


             vs
                                     likely have a large impact on
                                     its frictional force. For example,
                                     your kitchen tiles would have
                                     lower friction with the ground
                                     than carpet would as tiles are
                                     much smoother.




          Temperature
Surprisingly, the weather can also have an impact
on friction! Since many surfaces' properties change
as the temperature changes, their frictional forces
with objects may change with these properties as
well.



11                  1.2 FRICTION + AIR
    TYPES OF FRICTION
           Static                          Kinetic
  Static     friction  is   the    Kinetic friction is defined as
  frictional force between an      the frictional force between
  object and the ground when       an object and the ground
  the object is not moving.        when the object is sliding.
  Static friction is the force     Kinetic friction depends on
  needed to move an object         the roughness of the surface;
  out of rest. To conquer static   the friction in the surface
  friction, you need to push       causes objects to slow down
  the object with a force          and stop after a certain
  greater than the static          distance (e.g. a large box that
  friction force.                  is pushed by a human).


FRICTION                           FRICTION
 FORCE                              FORCE               MOVEMENT



   Object with no movement;
   static friction acting on the   Teddy bear moving to the right
   object                          due to an external force; kinetic
                                   friction acting on it


                         OUTSIDE      FRICTION
 FRICTION
                          FORCE        FORCE
  FORCE




     Outside force overcomes       The Teddy bear slows down and
     static friction force         stops due to kinetic friction.




                       1.2 FRICTION + AIR                     12
     TYPES OF FRICTION
         Fluid                              Rolling
Why is it harder to move your      Similar to kinetic friction,
legs and body when you are         rolling friction is the frictional
swimming than when you are         force of an object when it is
walking on a surface? The          rolling. The force for rolling
answer is fluid friction. Fluid    friction is usually lower than
friction is the frictional force   kinetic friction as it is much
between an object and a type       easier and takes less effort to
of fluid like air or water and a   roll an object than push it on
type of fluid like air or water.   a rough surface            Rolling
Unlike other types of friction,    friction is also affected by
fluid friction is affected by      other factors like velocity.
other factors like viscosity.




                                    Ball rolling on ground;
Air resistance; an example of       experiences rolling friction
fluid friction




Water resistance; example of         Car wheels experience
fluid friction                       rolling friction with surface




13                   1.2 FRICTION + AIR
              APPLICATION
 Experiment#1:                            Experiment#2:
 Rolling Friction                         Static Friction
1. Take any ball you have in your       1. Take any small box you have
  house                                   in your house
2. Roll it on your house floor (or      2. Push/slide it on your house
  any smooth floor if your house          floor (or any smooth floor if
  floor is rough)                         your house floor is rough; the
3. Time how long it takes to roll a       floor needs to be fairly
  total of 1 meter                        smooth)
4. Repeat steps 1-3, except roll        3. Repeat steps 1-3, except
  the ball on a more rough                slide the box on a much more
  surface this time (outdoors); try       rough surface this time
  to apply the same amount of             (outdoors)
  force to roll the ball as you did     4. Note the difficulty in
  on the smooth surface                   pushing the box on the
5. Compare the time it took for           smooth surface vs the
  the ball to roll the given              difficulty in pushing on the
  distance on both surfaces               rough surface


        Question                              Question
Did the ball take less, more, or the   Did it take you more, less, or the
same amount of time to roll 1          same amount of effort to push
meter on the rough surface than        the box on the smooth surface
on the smoother one? Explain.          than the rough surface? Explain.




                       1.2 FRICTION + AIR                            14
THOUGHT PROVOKING

                              Imagine friction
                              suddenly
                              disappearing off the
                              face of the Earth.
                              How do you think
                              this would affect the
                              planet and its
                              processes?

 Suppose you take any
 mass and drop it from
 different heights, finding
 the time it takes to reach
 the ground. Using this,
 you calculate the vertical
 acceleration of the
 object. Is it possible for
 the ball to accelerate
 since there is fluid
 friction pushing it up?
 Why or why not?



15             1.2 FRICTION + AIR
       1.3 HOW
    AIRPLANES FLY
  How do airplanes actually fly?

        Questions of the day
             x75   How are planes such as the Boeing 747 able
                   to fly despite weighing around 900,000
                   pounds, which is about 75 full-grown
                   elephants?

                   Why do smaller planes experience more
                   turbulence than larger planes?

                   Why do airplanes have propellers in the
                   front instead of the back?




KEY WORDS
    Lift
   Drag
  Weight
  Newton
 Lightning
   Flight
  Thrust
  Engine
Turbulence



         1.3 HOW AIRPLANES FLY                            16
                             DRAG
                                  What is drag?
                          When an airplane is flying, it has to move
                          through the air, which creates resistance or
                          drag. Drag is the force that opposes motion
                          through a fluid, such as air or water. It is caused
                          by friction between the object and the fluid and
                          increases with the object's speed and surface
 That force you feel      area. In the case of airplanes, it is the force that
 when putting your        acts against the forward motion of the aircraft.
  hand outside the        It is caused by the friction of the air flowing
 window in a moving       over the surface of the airplane, which
  car is called drag.     generates turbulence and a pressure difference
                          between the front and rear of the aircraft.



                          Why is drag important?
                          Drag is critical for airplanes to fly safely and
                          efficiently as pilots use it to control speed and
                          altitude during takeoff, landing, and flight.
  Knowing how drag        Adjusting flaps and other aerodynamic devices
effects an airplane is    allows pilots to increase or decrease drag,
essential for flying an   enabling them to slow down or speed up, climb
airplane as safely and    or descend, or maintain a stable flight path. Drag
  stable as possible.     plays a vital role in the stability and control of an
                          airplane, such as during a stall, when increased
                          drag causes the nose of the aircraft to drop and
                          restores airflow over the wings. Similarly, during
                          maneuvers, drag on the outer wing increases,
                          preventing the aircraft from rolling too far and
                          maintaining a stable flight.



 17                 1.3 HOW AIRPLANES FLY
                        THRUST
What is thrust?
Thrust is defined as a force that pushes an
object in a specific direction. In the case of
airplanes, thrust is generated by the airplane's
engines, which provide the necessary power to
overcome the drag and lift the aircraft into the
air. Thrust is one of the fundamental forces
involved in flight, and it is necessary for
airplanes to fly.
The engine of an airplane generates thrust by       The average NASA
compressing air and mixing it with fuel in the      rocket's boosters
combustion chamber. The ignited fuel and            generate a combined
                                                    thrust of about 5.3
compressed air rapidly expand, creating a high-
                                                    million pounds or 40
pressure and high-velocity stream of exhaust        million horsepower.
gases that are expelled out of the back of the      That is equivalent to
engine. This expelled stream of gases provides      the amount of energy
                                                    produced by 400,000
the thrust force necessary to move the airplane
                                                    cars.
forward. Thrust is used to propel the airplane
forward, overcoming the force of drag that acts
in the opposite direction. Drag is the resistance
experienced by the airplane as it moves
through the air, caused by factors such as air
resistance, friction, and turbulence. Without
enough thrust to overcome drag, the airplane
would be unable to move forward and would
remain stationary.
  Thrust is in
 the direction
   of motion


                     1.3 HOW AIRPLANES FLY                        18
                                 LIFT
                         What is lift?
                         Lift is an upward force that is exerted on an object
                         when it moves through a fluid, such as air or
                         water. In the case of airplanes, lift is used to
                         overcome the force of gravity and keep the
                         aircraft airborne. While drag is the force parallel
                         and in the opposite direction of the flow force, lift
                         is the upward force that is perpendicular to the
                         flow force. It is what keeps objects in the air and
  Pilots control the     able to gain altitude.
lift of an airplane by
 adjusting the angle
  of attack and the      Why is lift important?
     speed of the        To understand how lift works, it is important to
  aircraft. When the     understand the basic principles of aerodynamics.
   angle of attack is    The shape of an airplane's wings is designed to
 increased, the wing     create a difference in air pressure above and
 produces more lift,     below the wing. This difference in pressure
allowing the aircraft    generates lift. The curved upper surface of the
 to climb. When the      wing is longer than the flat lower surface, which
   angle of attack is    means that air traveling over the top of the wing
  decreased, the lift    has to travel a greater distance than air traveling
 decreases, causing      under the wing. This causes the air to move faster
    the aircraft to      over the top of the wing, creating a lower air
       descend.          pressure than the air underneath the wing. This
                         difference in pressure creates an upward force
                         that lifts the airplane off the ground. The amount
                         of lift generated by an airplane depends on
                         several factors, including the speed of the aircraft,
                         the angle of attack (the angle at which the wing
                         meets the airflow), the shape and size of the wing,
                         and the air density. Similarly, increasing the speed
                         of the aircraft increases the amount of lift, while
                         decreasing the speed reduces the lift.



19                  1.3 HOW AIRPLANES FLY
             WEIGHT IN
           AERODYNAMICS
How is weight used in
flight?
Weight   is   a   critical     component      in     the
mechanics of an airplane's ability to fly. To
understand how weight is used and necessary
for   airplanes   to    fly,   it   is   essential    to    A lightweight airplane
understand the basic principles of flight. This                can withstand the
is where the importance of weight becomes                       forces of flight
                                                              through the use of
clear. An airplane must be designed to be as
                                                            lightweight materials,
lightweight as possible while still being strong
                                                            such as aluminum and
enough to withstand the forces of flight.                    composite materials,
However, weight is not only important for                         and careful
generating lift. It is also crucial for maintaining              engineering.
stability during flight. An airplane's center of                          Lift
gravity (CG) must be carefully balanced to
ensure that the airplane remains stable in the             Drag
air. The CG is the point on the airplane where
all the weight is concentrated. If the CG is too                            Thrust
far forward or too far back, the airplane will be
unstable and difficult to control. To ensure                 Gravity
that the CG is properly balanced, the weight of
an airplane's passengers, cargo, and fuel must                In an airplane, the
be distributed evenly throughout the airplane.              upwards force is lift,
This is why airlines often have strict weight              the downwards force
restrictions for passengers and baggage. By                is weight, the forward
carefully managing the weight of an airplane,                force is thrust, and
pilots can ensure that it remains stable and                the backwards force
safe during flight.                                                 is drag.



                       1.3 HOW AIRPLANES FLY                                20
              APPLICATION
      HOW TO BUILD A HOMEMADE KITE!


                            Materials:
  2 thick rods or sticks (one longer than the other), some lightweight
fabric (Ex. plastic bags or tissue paper), string, scissors, glue, a marker
                                  or pen



                        Instructions:
1. Start by making the frame of the
   kite. Take the longer rod and mark
   the center. Place the shorter rod
   perpendicular to the longer one,
   making a cross shape. Glue the two
   rods together at the center point
   where they meet.




                                 2. Cut notches at the ends of both rods
                                 using the scissors. Tie a piece of string
                                 around one end of the longer rod, and
                                 knot it into the notch.




3. Stretch the fabric over the frame of
the kite, leaving some excess on all
sides. Use glue to attach the fabric to
the rods at the edges.




21                1.3 HOW AIRPLANES FLY
             APPLICATION
     HOW TO BUILD A HOMEMADE KITE!


                        Instructions:
4. Cut a length of string that is about
three times the length of the kite. Tie
one end to the knot at the top of the
kite. Run the string through the notch at
the bottom of the kite, and tie it off
securely.




                                 5. Attach a tail to the bottom of the
                                 kite using a long piece of string. This
                                 will help stabilize the kite and keep it
                                 from flipping over in the wind.




6. Cut off the excess fabric, leaving
about an inch of overhang. Fold the
overhang over the edges of the rods,
and glue it down to create a neat edge.




                               7. Your kite is now ready to test! Make
                               sure to look for all four laws of flight in
                               action!




                1.3 HOW AIRPLANES FLY                               22
THOUGHT PROVOKING
  How does differences in air temperature
      affect the balance of a plane?
                                  Lift

                      Drag


                                    Thrust


                        Gravity




   Why are wind shears
  extremely dangerous
    to landing planes?
  When are planes most
vulnerable to wind shears?




                         What is needed to
                        make an airplane fly
                           backwards?



23        1.3 HOW AIRPLANES FLY
    1.4 AIR PRESSURE
How does air pressure play a role in planes?


                Questions of the day:
                          How does the cabin stay warm
                          even when you are so high up?


                          Why are the windows oval-shaped?


                           Why is there a pinhole at the
                           bottom of every window?




 KEY WORDS
 Principle
 Air
 Hypoxia
 Distribution
 Properties
 Area
 Atmosphere
 Oval
 Force
 Pressure




                   1.4 AIR PRESSURE                        24
            WHAT DOES
          PRESSURE MEAN
                        The general definition of pressure is the force
  PRESSURE              applied perpendicular to the surface of an
                        object per unit area over which that force is
                        distributed. Air pressure plays a huge role
                        inside airplanes. A proper value of air
                        pressure inside an airplane cabin is very
                        important. It helps the oxygen in the cabin to
                        stay stable and allows passengers to breath. It
                        also keeps the cabin at a stable temperature.
                        The pressure is directly proportional to the
                        force applied. However, pressure is inversely
                        proportional to the surface area.


  What happens when you lose cabin
  pressure?
  When cabin air pressure is lost on a plane, it is
  a very dangerous scenario because the oxygen
  level in the cabin would reduce eventually
  causing hypoxia (oxygen starvation) and
  harming the passengers in the plane. Loss of
  cabin pressure is usually caused by air leaking
  through a hole in the plane or a cosmetic
  failure.

                       When an airplane cabin gets depressurized
                       passengers get hypoxia as mentioned above, if
                       a strict course of action is not taken, the
                       passenger can go unconscious or even worse, it
                       can lead to death. Hence when cabin pressure
                       is lost, the priority of keeping the passengers
                       safe is taken very seriously.



25                     1.4 AIR PRESSURE
By. XXX
          WINDOW SHAPE
  How does oval shape windows help
  with cabin air pressure?
Today airplanes use oval-shaped windows because they are really good
when it comes to pressure distribution. Being an oval shape, it has
curved edges instead of sharp or 90-degree edges. Curved edges help
with the air distribution and hence keep the cabin pressurized so that
the oxygen rate also stays stable and doesn't allow air to escape. It also
plays a role in the airplane's performance, since the plane flies at a high
speed, the curved edges help with the smooth flow of air around the
edges to make the airplane fly efficiently.
                                                          Fri
                                                             cti
                                                                on

                               Pressure

                 CURVED
                  EDGES

   Why are the windows oval in shape
   instead of other shapes?
                       This is mainly done for safety purposes. Square
                       windows have very sharp angles which usually
                       causes the fuselage (airplane body) to expand.
                       It isn't capable of maintaining normal cabin air
                       pressure.
                       As mentioned above, the shape of the window
                       also plays a role in the airplane's performance.
                       Square-shaped windows are not as efficient
                       compared to oval-shaped windows because
       SHARPED         there isn't a proper way to distribute air around
                       sharp edges hence affecting the performance.
         EDGES


                       1.4 AIR PRESSURE                              26
            CALCULATING
             PRESSURE
Having a normal pressure reading in
the cabin is extremely important to
breathe properly. High air pressure
or low air pressure can be very
dangerous on airplanes. Significantly
High or low pressure has a very high
risk of catastrophic failure. The plane
can explode into billion pieces mid-
flight, if there the pressure is not
right. When the airplane is at a
cruising altitude, the cabin pressure
is 12 pounds per square inch (PSI).


                              We have learned of the dangers we face
                              with extremely low and extremely high

        FORCE
                              cabin pressure and what normal cabin
                              pressure is. Now we learn how to find the
     --------------           pressure with the given information (i.e

         AREA                 force applied and area of a surface). The
                              simplest way to calculate pressure is by
                              dividing    the     forcee   applied   on   a
                              particular area of the surface.

As mentioned above, it is crucial to maintain
cabin   pressure   in   the   normal     range.   In
airplanes, the computers monitor the pressure
24/7 and when the pressure falls below normal,
the oxygen masks get deployed.




27                      1.4 AIR PRESSURE
        PRESSURE VS AIR
         TEMPERATURE
 How does air temperature effect cabin
 pressure?       Even the temperature of the air plays
                               a role to maintain proper air pressure.
                               If cold air is denser than hot air, the
                               weight would be more than warm
                               temperatures. Air temperature also
                               affects   the    performance     of    an
                               Airplane. Since cold air is way denser
                               than warm air, it creates more lift in
                               cold air compared to hot air hence
                               making the airplane air born easier.


 Bernoulli's principle and Boyle's law
Bernoulli's principle states that an
increase in speed happens at the
same time as a decrease in pressure.
This principle explains fluid behavior
in diverse applications, from airplane
flight to water flow in pipes.




                           Boyle's law states that the gas pressure is
                            inversely proportional to its volume at
                                     constant temperature.



                      1.4 AIR PRESSURE                                28
           LANDING GEAR
 What is a landing gear on planes?
                                The landing gear is the wheels attached
                                to a plane to help move from one place
                                to another on the ground. They help
                                with take-off and lading as well. The
                                landing gear system on an airplane is
                                built to handle extensive force and
                                colossal weight. They even affect the
                                plane's performance mid-flight. They
                                use hydraulic pressure to retract and
                                deploy during mid-flight.



How does the Landing gear affect the
airplane's performance
The landing gear on airplanes also plays a
significant role in the airplane's performance.
Have you ever noticed that the wheels (landing
gear) retract when the plane lifts off from the
ground? That is done to improve the
aerodynamics of the aircraft. when the wheels are
still down mid-flight, airflow will be improper and
the plane won't fly efficiently. We know that it gets
freezing at cruising altitude (i.e. near the earth's
atmosphere), which may affect the rubber on the
tires. When the wheels are retracted, it does not
create any air restriction. Hence the plane can fly
faster. It also helps while landing because it helps
the pilots maintain a slower speed to perform a
soft landing.



29                     1.4 AIR PRESSURE
THOUGHT PROVOKING

Why is there a layer of
plastic material inside
 the window surface?




                            What's the
                             difference
          OR              between these 2
                          when it comes to
                              air flow?



    Does temperature
 reduce/increase/ stay the
same when you reach a high
         altitude?



                                       30
THOUGHT PROVOKING

             What happens to
             air pressure and
             temperature when
             we move more into
             the atmosphere?



What is the instrument
used to calculate air
pressure?

             Air pressure is high
             when it is raining
             (True/False)?



What is hydraulic
pressure and how does
it work?

31       1.4 AIR PRESSURE
   1.5 SUSTAINABLE
       AVIATION
What are the benefits of airplanes and
 how are they constantly evolving?

     Questions of the day:

                How do airplanes help millions of people?

                How could airplanes improve?

                How would they help society?




KEY WORDS

Airplane
Design
Technology
Emissions
Innovation
Improvement
Aerodynamic
Engine




         1.5 SUSTAINABLE AVIATION                    32
HISTORY OF AVIATION
WRIGHT FLYER
The Wright Flyer flight on December 17,
1903, is widely recognized as the first
successful aircraft flight. The Wright Flyer
was a biplane (pictured to the right) with a
40-foot wingspan and weighed slightly over
600 pounds. While the flight only lasted 12
seconds and the plane only traveled 120
feet, it marked the beginning of the age of
aviation.


                            FIRST COMMERCIAL FLIGHT
                            The first ever commercial flight occurred
                            on January 1, 1914, with just a singular
                            passenger. The mayor of St. Petersburg
                            paid $400 to fly 21 miles from St.
                            Petersburg, Florida to Tampa, Florida. This
                            marked the beginning of the commercial
                            flight industry.



 JET ENGINES
 Jet engines were developed in the 1930s
 by German and British engineers, both
 working independently. Jet engines were
 first implemented into aircraft during
 World War II, and they increased the
 speed, efficiency, and reliability of flights.




33              1.5 SUSTAINABLE AVIATION
 HISTORY OF AVIATION
FIRST SUPERSONIC FLIGHT
In 1947 the United States Air Force chose
Chuck Yeager to fly the Bell X-1, the
world's first plane capable of breaking the
sound barrier. The plane reached an
altitude of 45,000 feet and a speed of
Mach 1.06, which was around 700 mph.
This was the start of the development of
supersonic aircraft which is thought to be
a large step in aircraft development.




                       FIRST FLIGHT ACROSS ATLANTIC
                        The first ever non-stop flight across the Atlantic
                        Ocean occurred in 1919 by the British pilot's
                        John Alcock and Arthur Brown. The men flew
                        around 1900 miles from Canada to Ireland in
                        over 16 hours. This marked the beginning of a
                        now-blooming tourism and travel industry.



       GLOBAL SOLO FLIGHT
Wiley Post was an American pilot who
completed the first-ever solo flight around
the world. In approximately a week, he
flew nearly 16,000 miles and demonstrated
the capabilities of aircraft. This inspired
generations to come to continue to develop
the industry of aviation and follow in his
footsteps.




                    1.5 SUSTAINABLE AVIATION                          34
               EVOLUTION OF
                 AVIATION
  COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY
In the 1960s, computer technology began
to be used in the navigation and control
of aircraft. Computer technology allowed
for more efficient flights through more
accurate navigation with technology such
as radar. This was a large milestone in the
improvement of aviation and technology
has continued to develop since then.




                                    GLOBAL AIR TRAVEL
                          Through the gradual deregulation of global
                          airspaces, airplanes began to be allowed to
                          travel across countries and even continents.
                          This was a pivotal factor that eventually led to
                          the globalization of aviation and large-scale
                          commercial flying.



         AERODYNAMICS
Over the years since the introduction of
airplanes, especially during the 1970s, there
was a focus on improving aerodynamics.
Aerodynamics is the study of how air
interacts with planes and affects their
motion. Improvements in aerodynamics
made flights take less fuel and be more
efficient which allowed for the expansion of
the aviation industry.



35            1.5 SUSTAINABLE AVIATION
             EVOLUTION OF
               AVIATION
        CARBON FIBER
One objective of airplane design is
reducing the weight of the planes.
Early planes, like the Wright Flyer,
were made of heavy, solid materials
like oak wood, and this limited their
range and efficiency. Carbon fiber was
invented in the 1980s and when
incorporated into aviation it made
planes much lighter and easier to
launch and control. Carbon fiber is a
synthetic material that is extremely
malleable while still being light and is
a large reason airplanes are able to be
so widespread today.


                               FUEL EFFICIENT ENGINES
                                Engines have continued to evolve to be
                                increasingly fuel efficient. This has
                                contributed to decreasing the cost of
                                flights, and emissions. An additional
                                benefit has been increasing the range
                                planes can fly by decreasing the
                                amount of weight they must carry. The
                                largest    developments   in   efficient
                                engines were during the 1990s when
                                multiple breakthroughs were made.




                  1.5 SUSTAINABLE AVIATION                          36
 AVIATION IN SOCIETY
            BENEFITS OF MODERN AVIATION
                Over 1 billion passengers a year
  Safety and efficiency optimized through GPS and navigation
          Increases global connectivity through travel
                  Allows for cultural exchange
                  Tourism boosts the economy
                          Global Trade
                    New Economical Sectors
              Aerospace manufacturing + engineering


      CONCERNS                     POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS
While aviation has many           Fuel efficiency
benefits for society there are        Efficient engines
many concerns surrounding             Lighter construction
it, primarily environmental.          More aerodynamic designs
Global warming is a prevalent         Alternative fuel sources
issue currently and airplanes     Pilotless flights
                                      Increase safety
consume large amounts of fuel
                                  Increased speed
and have a lot of emissions. In
                                      Supersonic
order     to  combat     global
                                  Use of 3d printing in
warming, one important factor     manufacturing
is decreasing the natural gas         Possible to decrease costs
emissions    associated    with       Lightweight part
aircraft.




37            1.5 SUSTAINABLE AVIATION
            APPLICATION
                 PARACHUTE EXPERIMENT
Create a small parachute using materials such as plastic bags or
tissue paper. Attach a weight, such as a small toy, to the
parachute and drop it from a height. Experiment with different
parachute sizes and shapes to see how they affect the speed and
efficiency of the descent.


         MATERIALS
  Light plastic bag or thin paper
  Toy or other small items
  String
  Tape

          STEPS
1. Gather your materials (see
   above)
2. Attach the string to the bag
   or paper using tape
3. Attach the lightweight object
   to the string by tying the
   string around it or with the
   tape
4. Drop from various heights
   and try different materials
   and weights, observe the
   changes made in the speed
   of falling.




                1.5 SUSTAINABLE AVIATION                   38
THOUGHT PROVOKING
 WHY IS IT IMPORTANT FOR AIRPLANES TO BE
              FUEL EFFICIENT?
 Think about what would happen if airplanes consumed much more
 fuel every trip. What would change about the world? Analyze
 impacts on the environment, economy, and access to flights.


                Agriculture
                  10.1%
                                        Transportation
Commercial                                  28.3%
  13.1%




     Industry
       23.2%
                                    Electricity
                                      25.3%
                 Carbon Emissions



     WHY AREN'T PRIVATE PLANES READILY
                AVAILABLE?
 In the status quo, only the wealthy use private planes often. Why
 is this? Think about how the world would change if every person
 was able to use private planes when needed. What factors stop
 this from being possible?




39              1.5 SUSTAINABLE AVIATION
     1.6 APPLYING TO
        AIRPLANES
WHAT ARE FORCES AND WHY DO THEY MATTER?


               QUESTIONS OF THE DAY
                   How does the design of a paper airplane
                   affect its flight performance?
                   Can the paper airplane's flight be controlled
                   and manipulated, and if so, how?
                   What role does aerodynamics play in the
                   flight of a paper airplane?
                   How does the weight distribution of a paper
                   airplane affect its flight?




  KEY WORDS
    Pressure
     Weight
      Wing
      Drag
      Mass
     Angle
     Thrust
      Lift
     Airflow



           1.6 APPLYING TO AIRPLANES                        40
       IMPORTANCE OF
      PAPER AIRPLANES
 WHAT ARE THEY FOR?
 Airplanes are vital for global connectivity, trade, and tourism,
 enabling fast travel and cultural exploration. They also aid in
 emergencies, delivering aid and saving lives. The aviation industry
 creates jobs and boosts the economy. Advancements in technology
 have made planes safer and more fuel-efficient and contributed to
 progress.
                                     Carrying medicine




 HISTORY OF THE PAPER AIRPLANE
Early in the 20th century, Leonardo da Vinci began experimenting with
paper folding to make basic flying toys. This is when the history of paper
aircraft can be found. These early paper crafts over time developed into
more complex designs and gained popularity all across the world. Paper
airplanes were a common type of entertainment soldiers used to pass
the time during World War II. In the years that followed, making paper
airplanes became a well-liked activity for both kids and adults, sparking
the creation of several books, periodicals, and websites that provide
instructions on how to create various designs. People still enjoy making
paper airplanes nowadays because they can use their imagination and
ingenuity to build one-of-a-kind flying creations that soar through the
air.




41           1.6 APPLYING TO AIRPLANES
  FACTORS AFFECTING
   PAPER AIRPLANES
                                     Wingspan
                                     The wingspan of paper airplanes affects
                                     their flight performance in several
                                     ways. A wider wingspan provides more
                                     surface   area,   generating       lift   and
                                     extending flight time. Additionally, an
                                     even   wingspan     is   crucial   for    the
                                     stability of the airplane during flight, as
                                     an uneven wingspan can cause the
                                     plane to topple over and crash.


       Flat Tip                                Pointed Tip
Flat-tipped paper airplanes          A pointed tip on a paper airplane offers
offer many benefits in order         multiple advantages. Firstly, it reduces
to   enhance    their   abilities.   drag, allowing the plane to fly more
Firstly, they increase airflow       efficiently and cover greater distances.
over   the    plane's   surface,     Secondly, it improves aerodynamics by
reducing drag and improving          smoothly guiding airflow across the
efficiency.   Secondly,    these     wing's surface. This leads to a stable
planes enhance stability and         and predictable flight path for the
accuracy, helping to minimize        paper airplane.
turbulence during flight. This
results in smoother and more
effective flights. Additionally,
flat tips are known to enhance
a paper airplane's speed and
distance-traveling abilities.
                                                              Pointed Tip

                  1.6 APPLYING TO AIRPLANES                                    42
  FACTORS AFFECTING
   PAPER AIRPLANES
                                               Weight
                                      The weight of a paper airplane has
                                      various effects on its flight
                                      performance.      Heavier   planes
                                      pose challenges in launching and
                                      control but offer slower and more
                                      stable flights due to increased
                                      gravitational force. Conversely,
                                      lighter planes fly faster and are
                                      more agile but may stall or lose
                                      altitude quickly due to reduced
                                      wing lift. Lighter paper airplanes
                                      require less force to launch and
                                      offer increased maneuverability,
                                      allowing for quick and agile

  Launching Angle                     flights, but they are more
                                      susceptible to wind disturbances
The launching angle is crucial for and may struggle to maintain a
paper airplanes as it determines the steady course.
initial trajectory of the flight. It
greatly affects speed, height, and
stability. A steep launch angle can
lead to excessive speedd and quick
altitude loss, making the plane
difficult to control and prone to
crashing. Conversely, a shallow angle
results in slow and unsteady flight,
reducing the distance covered.
Optimal launch angles ensure a
balanced flight with good speed,
altitude, stability, and control.




43           1.6 APPLYING TO AIRPLANES
      FORMER RECORD
    AIRPLANE DISTANCE




  Fold the paper in half                              Fold the new
                            Fold the corners of     corners of each
   lengthwise: Fold the
                             each side to the      side to the crease
paper in half lengthwise,
                               crease on the        on the center of
 creating a crease down
                            center of the paper        the paper
the center of the paper.




Make sure to flatten                                Fold the plane
   all the creases                                backwards in half
                              Flip the folded
properly or else you                              so that each side
                            paper back side up
   might not get                                   is on top of the
  desired results.                                      other


                  1.6 APPLYING TO AIRPLANES                   44
      FORMER RECORD
    AIRPLANE DISTANCE




Make a vertical                                 Lift the wings and
fold on each side          Crease the            make sure both
to the base of           fold and make           wings are at the
the plane to             sure it is flush         same angle to
make the wings                                  keep it balanced


Please follow the instructions carefully to
ensure the best possible results. To avoid
injury, refrain from throwing paper airplanes
near anyone's face or eyes. Also, be mindful
of your surroundings and avoid flying paper
airplanes in areas with low ceilings or near
fragile objects. Never throw paper airplanes
out of windows or balconies. Always handle
paper airplanes with caution and supervise
children when making and flying them. Keep
in mind that safety should always come first
when enjoying this fun and entertaining
activity.




45            1.6 APPLYING TO AIRPLANES
   FORMER RECORD
 AIRPLANE DISTANCE
    EXPLANATION
The primary design, weight     John Collins' World Record Paper
distribution, and throwing     Aircraft is a remarkable illustration
prowess of the notable         of how design and balance may
paper airplane are just a      impact a paper airplane's flying. The
few of the contributing        aircraft's expertly balanced design
aspects that allow it to fly   that balances the four forces of
as far as it does.             flight—lift, weight, push, and drag—
                               has helped it set the world record for
                               the longest flight. The 155-degree
                               dihedral angle of the aircraft is one
                               of the primary design features that
                               contribute to its remarkable flight.




A well-made paper airplane
with a balanced weight
distribution, along with a
symmetrical shape will fly
farther and steadier. The      By ensuring the best possible airflow
throw's    technique   and     over the wings, this angle aids in
speed will also have a big     maintaining the balance of the
impact on how far the          aircraft while it is in flight. The
plane travels. The total       plane's pointed front also aids in
distance a paper airplane      reducing drag, which slows it down.
will travel can also be        The plane's slope allows more air to
influenced by variables like   flow by.
wind speed and direction.



               1.6 APPLYING TO AIRPLANES                         46
THOUGHT PROVOKING
  Can the principles of paper airplane
design be applied to real aircraft design?




                   Can a paper airplane
                   be used for scientific
                     research, such as
                    studying airflow or
                       turbulence?

How can the design
of a paper airplane
 be optimized for
distance, speed, or
     accuracy?

47      1.6 APPLYING TO AIRPLANES
  FLOW OF
ELECTRICITY




   CHECK OUT
  OUR YOUTUBE
   CHANNEL!
       2.1 ELECTRICITY
What is electricity and how is it used?

Questions of the day:
                                   How is electricity made, and
                                   what are some of its benefits
                                      and disadvantages?




 Where does lightning come from?




Keywords
 Neutron
 Electric
 Proton
 Electron
 Static
 Charged
 Energy
 Circuit
 Current




49                 2.1 ELECTRICITY
   FLOW OF ELECTRICITY
                    What is the flow of electricity?
                    Similarly to how water flows in pipes, electricity
                    flows through its own type of pipes. Wires,
                    conductors, and other electrically conductive
                    materials provide a path that electricity needs to
                    flow, also known as an electrical current. This
                    current travels through the wires from a power
                    source, such as a battery or a power plant, to the
                    appliance you want to use, such as a TV. Electricity
                    has become a daily part of our lives. From a lightbulb
                    to a charger to the massive satellites in orbit, which
                    all require electricity, our society now depends upon
                    electricity.


What does the flow look like?
Electricity is a type of energy that flows
through wires to power devices, but it's
not something we can see with our eyes. If
we could, it might look like a bright and
fast-moving spark, but in reality, we must
use other ways to know when electricity is
flowing. For example, we can tell when
electricity is flowing by the devices that
turn on, like a light bulb or a fan, as the
functioning of the utility shows the flow.
Even though we can't see the flow of
electricity literally, we can still tell when
it's flowing as it powers devices and makes
them work.



                         2.1 ELECTRICITY                             50
 PROTONS, ELECTRONS,
    AND NEUTRONS
The flow of electrons in the flow of electricity is
called electric current. Electric current is measured
in units of amperes (often shortened to "amps"),
which is the rate at which electric charge flows
through a material. When a large number of
electrons are moving through a material, the
electric current is strong, and when fewer electrons
are moving, the electric current is weaker.


                                     Electrons, protons, and neutrons play
                                     a crucial role in the flow of electricity.
                                     Electricity is the movement of electric
                                     charge, and the electric charge is
                                     carried by electrons. In an atom,
                                     electrons are negatively charged
                                     particles that orbit around the
                                     positively charged nuclei, which are
                                     made up of protons and neutrons.


The flow of electricity is directly related
to the movement of electrons. When an
electric field is applied to a material, it
causes the electrons to move, creating
an electric current. The number of
electrons and protons in an atom affects
its electrical properties, as materials with
an excess of electrons are said to be
negatively charged, while materials with
fewer electrons are said to be positively
charged.



51                       2.1 ELECTRICITY
PROTONS, ELECTRONS,
   AND NEUTRONS
This relationship between electrons, protons,
and the flow of electricity can be understood
through the concept of electric charge.
Electric charge is a fundamental property of
matter and is determined by the number of
electrons and protons in an atom. When there
are more electrons than protons in an atom, it
is negatively charged; when there are more
protons than electrons, it is positively
charged.




                      In conclusion, electrons, protons, and neutrons
                      all play a role in the flow of electricity. Electrons
                      carry the electric charge and determine the
                      electrical properties of a material, and the
                      movement of electrons creates the electric
                      current. The number of electrons and protons in
                      an atom also affects its electrical properties and
                      the flow of electricity.




                        2.1 ELECTRICITY                              52
         CONDUCTORS AND
           INSULATORS
              Conductors                     Insulators
                Copper                       Rubber
               Aluminum                       Glass
                 Silver                     Pure water
                Humans                         Oil


The flow of electricity is affected   Insulators, on the other hand,
by the type of material the current   have few free electrons, so
passing through. Conductors have      electric currents cannot flow
a high number of free electrons,      easily through these materials
which are electrons that are not      Examples of insulators include
tightly bound to a particular atom.   rubber, wood, glass, and air.
These loose electrons can move        Insulators are usually found in
freely through various materials,     electrical systems to protect
allowing electric current to flow     people and equipment from
easily. Examples of conductors        electric shock and to prevent
include copper, aluminum, and         electrical fires.
silver.




53                      2.1 ELECTRICITY
                    LIGHTNING

Why does Lightning Occur?
Lightning occurs when there is a buildup of
electrical charge in the atmosphere,
usually in the form of thunderstorms. Air
acts as an insulator between the positive
and negative charges in the cloud and
between the cloud and the ground. When
the opposite charges build up enough, this
insulating capacity of the air breaks down,
and there is a rapid discharge of electricity
that we know as lightning.


The Discovery of                         Revolutionization
Electricity?                             of Electricity
In 1752, Benjamin Franklin flew a kite   Electricity has transformed the
with a metal key attached to it during   world by powering homes, cars,
a thunderstorm. He observed that         and factories, connecting people
the silk ribbon attached to the key      through technology. It led to the
became charged with electricity, and     invention of the telegraph, cars,
when he touched the key, he felt a       the telephone, and eventually
shock, demonstrating that lightning      even the internet. This changed
was indeed a form of electricity. This   how        we      communicated.
experiment was a significant step in     Electricity has also enabled new
understanding the true nature of         technologies, such as motors and
electricity and its relationship with    generators,        which       are
lightning,      leading    to      the   transforming the way we live and
development of lightning rods to         work. Today, it remains a vital
protect people and buildings from        part of modern society and
lightning strikes.                       continues to shape the future.



                         2.1 ELECTRICITY                               54
           APPLICATION

Steps needed:
Supplies needed:
A sink and a comb or a balloon

1. Turn on the faucet with a small stream of
  water
2. Charge the comb or balloon by rubbing it in
  your hair
3. Hold the comb or balloon close to the stream
  of water without touching it
4. Observe the water bending
5. Why do you think this happened?




55                2.1 ELECTRICITY
               APPLICATION
Why this works?
Atoms are made up of protons with a positive charge, neutrons with no
charge, and electrons with a negative charge. Typically, the positive and
negative charges in an atom balance each other out, making the atom
and the object it composes neutral in charge. However, when two
objects are rubbed together, some electrons may transfer, causing one
object to become positively charged and the other negatively charged.
This leads to their attraction due to their opposite charges. Static
electricity is less likely to build up on humid days because the charged
particles attach to the water molecules in the air.




The buildup of static electricity can be a useful phenomenon, but it can
also be problematic in certain situations. For example:
   Static electricity can pose a risk of fire or explosions in environments
   with flammable materials, such as gas stations, chemical plants, or
   grain silos.
   Static electricity buildup can cause discomfort or pain when it
   discharges through our bodies, such as when we get a shock from a
   doorknob or a car door.
   Static electricity can interfere with sensitive electronic equipment,
   such as in manufacturing plants or hospitals, where it can cause
   malfunctions or damage to equipment.
   Static electricity can attract dust and other particles, leading to
   cleanliness issues in certain environments, such as laboratories or
   clean rooms.



                         2.1 ELECTRICITY                              56
 THOUGHT PROVOKING

 Can the flow of electricity be used to create new
       forms of art, music, and expression?




  Electricity is currently made mainly through non-
renewable sources, what are the ways we can make it
                      renewable?




     What are different ways to produce energy?
     Which are friendly to the environment and
                    which are not?




57               2.1 ELECTRICITY
              2.2 MAGNET

Questions of the day
                   How can you magnetize a
                   material that is not naturally
                   magnetic?
                   How are magnets used in
                   transportation, such as trains and
                   levitating vehicles?
                   Are magnets able to lose their
                   magnetism over time? If so, why
                   and how can they be re-
                   magnetized?




Keywords
 Attraction
 Field
 Flux
 Force
 Levitate
 Magnetism
 Pole
 Repulsion




59              2.2
                2.2 MAGNET
                    MAGNET                        58
           HISTORY BEHIND
              MAGNETS
                             It was discovered that certain stones,
                             known as lodestones, could attract iron at
                             the beginning of magnetism's history. In
                             200 BC, the Chinese were the first to
                             record the usage of lodestones for
                             navigation. William Gilbert, an English
                             physician, studied magnetism through
                             experiments in the 16th century and
                             produced "De Magnete," which is regarded
                             as the first comprehensive analysis of
                             magnetism. He found that the Earth had a
                             north and south magnetic pole and
                             functioned as a gigantic magnet.


Electric currents produce magnetic fields,
as Hans Christian Oersted of Denmark
discovered     in   the   19th   century.
Electromagnets, which are utilized in
many modern technologies, including
motors and generators, were developed in
effect. The development of permanent
magnets(ex. fridges) and magnetic storage
technologies like hard drives and credit
cards were made possible by the
discovery of magnetic materials like iron,
nickel, and cobalt.

Nowadays, magnetism is employed for various purposes, from
renewable energy sources like wind turbines to diagnostic imaging. With
ongoing investigations into novel materials and future uses, it is still a
crucial area for study and innovation.



 59                      2.1 ELECTRICITY
         HOW DO MAGNETIC
          FIELDS BEHAVE
                    What is a magnetic field?
                    Magnetic fields are invisible force fields that surround
                    magnets or moving electric charges. They're created
                    by the movement of electric charges, such as
                    electrons, which generate electric currents. These
                    currents generate magnetic fields. Even though they
                    can't be seen, they can be detected with instruments
                    like compasses or magnetometers. The behavior of
                    magnetic fields is determined by the size and direction
                    of the electric currents and magnetic materials
                    involved, making them constantly changing and a bit
                    unpredictable.


Nature of a magnet
Magnetic fields have a dipolar nature, meaning they have a north and south
pole. This dipolar nature arises from the orientation of the electrons within
the magnetic material. The same poles repel each other, while opposite
poles attract. The strength of the magnetic field is strongest at the poles
and weaker further away. Magnetic fields can also pass through non-
magnetic materials, such as air, water, and plastic, making them ideal for
various applications.


Applications
Magnets and electric charges generate magnetic fields that surround us.
These fields power electronic devices such as generators, motors,
transformers, and even hard drives. Magnetic fields are essential for medical
imaging, particularly MRI scans, which capture detailed images of our organs
and tissues. Magnetic fields are also behind credit card production, security
systems, and the levitation of high-speed trains. These unique properties
make magnetic fields ideal for use in transportation, medicine, and
telecommunications.



59                           2.2
                             2.2 MAGNET
                                 MAGNET                                60
         MAGNETISM AND
           THE EARTH
                                                Molten Iron




The melting iron in the Earth's core is in constant motion and
generates electric currents, producing a magnetic field. This magnetic
field has North and South Poles, similar to a bar magnet. The Earth's
magnetic field is created by the motion of this molten iron, which is
heated by the planet's internal processes.

                           Effect on Earth
                          Earth's magnetic field is generated by the
                          motion of molten iron in its core, creating a
                          magnetic field with North and South Poles.
                          These poles are close to the geographic
                          North and South Poles. The Earth's magnetic
                          field protects the planet from harmful
                          cosmic radiation and charged particles from
                          the Sun and causes beautiful phenomena
                          such as the aurora borealis and aurora
                          australis.

                          The Earth's magnetic field is a vital force
                          that protects life on our planet by deflecting
                          harmful cosmic radiation and charged
                          particles from the Sun. This shield is critical
                          for preventing harm to living organisms.




61                         2.2 MAGNET
       WHAT MATERIALS
        ARE MAGNETIC
Some basic materials are magnetic.
Examples include iron, nickel, and
cobalt. These metals can produce
magnetic moments because each of
them has an outer electron shell
that is partially filled. The electrons
part of this outer shell makes it so
that it attracts the protons. These
magnetic moments are the product
of the electrons' orbital motion and
spin, which produce a magnetic
field.




                                    Individual     atoms'    magnetic
                                    moments line up with one
                                    another      in     ferromagnetic
                                    materials like iron, nickel, and
                                    cobalt to produce a potent net
                                    magnetic field. An external
                                    magnetic field can induce this
                                    alignment, producing a magnet
                                    that keeps its magnetization even
                                    when the external field is
                                    removed.



59                        2.2
                          2.2 MAGNET
                              MAGNET                             62
     TYPES OF MAGNETS
The strongest permanent magnets now on Earth
are neodymium iron boron (NdFeB) magnets.
They are created by adding neodymium, iron, and
boron in a precise ratio, followed by the
application of a powerful magnetic field. As the
generated magnet has a high energy density, it
can be applied to many different things, such as
electric motors and generators. Because the
electron arrangement of materials like paper,
glass, and rubber prevents the formation of
magnetic moments, these substances are not
magnetic. These materials' shifting electron
velocities cancel out any magnetic fields that
individual atoms might have produced.




In conclusion, the behavior of a material's electrons determines whether
it has magnetic properties. Metals with partially full outer electron
shells, like iron, nickel, and cobalt, can produce magnetic moments and
a net magnetic field. The strongest permanent magnets now on the
market are neodymium magnets (made with iro﻿n boron (NdFeB) ). Due
to their electron arrangement, other materials, including paper, glass,
and rubber, do not possess magnetic characteristics.



63                         2.2 MAGNET
             APPLICATION
Magnetic Fields Experiment:
                                           BAR MAGNET
 1. You will need a bar magnet
    and iron filings
 2. Place the magnet on a flat
    surface and sprinkle iron
    filings on top
 3. The filings will align
    themselves along the
    magnetic field lines, showing          IRON FILINGS
    the shape of the field
 4. You can use a plastic bag or a
    clear container to keep the
    filings contained
 5. Test with different fillings and
    metals to see what difference
    they make, and if they have
    the same magnetic field
 6. Record your experiment             ASSORTMENT OF METALS




                      S
               N


59                      2.2
                        2.2 MAGNET
                            MAGNET                        64
  THOUGHT PROVOKING
 Can magnets be used to create sustainable
             energy sources?




                     What factors influence
                   the strength and direction
                      of the magnetic field
                    generated by a magnet?


  How do magnetic fields
affect living organisms, and
what implications does this
have for the environment?




65                2.2 MAGNET
             2.3 HOW DO
           CIRCUITS WORK
  How does a electric circuit work and where are
                  they found?


            Questions of the day
                        Describe circuits in your own
                        words.
                        How do you think circuits
                        play a role in the world of
                        electricity?
                        Think of some examples of
                        circuits which is used in our
                        daily lives.




KEY WORDS
Battery
Light
Switch
Parallel
Series
Electric
Circuit
Light
Bulb



            2.3 HOW DO CIRCUITS WORK              66
    CIRCUITS: THE FLOW
      OF ELECTRICITY
                     What is a circuit?
                     An electric circuit is a closed loop that electricity
                     passes through. It can be oriented in almost any
                     shape and size. The circuit is made from individual
                     components—for example, battery, light bulb, wires,
                     etc. When all these components are put together in
                     a certain shape, it creates a path for electricity can
                     flow continuously. When a switch is installed on the
                     circuit, you can manually control the flow of
                     electricity in the circuit.


What is a closed and open circuit?
As mentioned above, a circuit is a
closed path that helps flow electricity
effortlessly. A circuit is called a
"closed circuit" when there is no
disturbance in the connection and
the shape is complete. When there
are no gaps, the electricity passes
through quickly.

                             Now we all know what a closed circuit is. On
                             the other hand, an open circuit is the
                             opposite of a closed circuit. When the
                             connection is broken, electricity stops
                             flowing, causing the bulb not to work. This
                             is caused by a bad connection on the
                             battery, a light switch in the off position,
                             and more. An open circuit would mean that
                             electrons would be lost from the system.


67               2.3 HOW DO CIRCUITS WORK
          COMPONENTS OF
             CIRCUIT
                    The battery is the primary power source for the

  Battery           electric circuit. It provides a source of energy for the
                    light bulb to turn on. However, using only one
                    battery for an electric circuit is not necessary. You
                    can run dual batteries if the bulb consumes more
                    power. On a regular battery, there are two
                    components, i.e one at the top and one at the
                    bottom. Those components are called terminal ends,
                    and they are represented as "+" and "-" as shown in
                    the diagram given. The "+" symbol at the top
                    represents the positive terminal. On the other hand,
                    the "-" represents the negative terminal.


                                                     Wires
The wires in an electric circuit help with the
flow of electricity from the battery to the
light bulb so that it can turn on. The wires
are connected directly from the terminal
ends of the battery to the connection
points on the light bulb. In some circuits,
the wires are connected to a light switch. If
the wires are damaged or split anywhere,
the flow of the electricity can get
disturbed, and the circuit becomes open.


      Loads
                         The light bulb is the most common load also
                         one of the most critical components in the
                         electric circuit because it lets us know if the
                         electricity in the circuit is flowing or not. If the
                         bulb does not light up, the battery could be
                         dead, or there is a problem with a circuit, such
                         as a broken wire, causing it to become an open
                         circuit.


                 2.3 HOW DO CIRCUITS WORK                              68
             CIRCUIT TYPES

                             What is a Series Circuit?
                             The series-type circuit lives up to its name.
                             The light bulbs are connected in one path,
                             and they are controlled by one light switch.
                             With series circuits, you do have a few
                             advantages and disadvantages. One of the
                             advantages is that you can power
                             everything with one switch. In a series
                             circuit, the electricity flows clockwise and
                             completes one loop. But on the other hand,
                             it does have its disadvantages. One of them
                             is that the whole system will shut down if
                             the connection becomes open.



What is a Parallel Circuit?
The parallel type circuit is the opposite
of a series circuit. The difference
between the two circuits is that both
light bulbs are oriented parallelly. It is
also connected separately from the
series circuit, where the bulbs are
connected on one path. A parallel circuit
also has its own advantages and
disadvantages. One advantage is that if
one wire is broken or disconnected, the
whole system won't shut off; the other
bulb will stay on. The disadvantage is
that both bulbs use the same battery,
which stresses the battery.


69               2.3 HOW DO CIRCUITS WORK
       ALTERNATING AND
       DIRECT CURRENT
What is Alternating Current?
 Alternating Current          An alternating current is where the
                              electricity in the circuit reverses at a
                              specific time, which happens periodically.
                              Alternating     current    has    its    own
                              advantages and disadvantages. One of the
                              advantages of AC (Alternating Current ) is
                              that it is less expensive to generate than
                              DC (Direct Current). AC current is capable
                              of traveling long distances. One of the
                              disadvantages of AC current is that high
                              voltage is used. High voltage can be very
                              dangerous to work with because there is
                              an increased risk of electric shock. AC
                              current is regularly used for electricity.


What is Direct Current?
Direct Current is the current that flows        Direct Current
straight in one path. Direct Current or DC
does not reverse periodically. DC current
also has its own advantages and
disadvantages. One advantage is DC
current is that you can regulate the
current flow in the circuit, for example
regulating the speed of a regular DC
motor. One disadvantage of DC current is
that the maintenance cost is very high
compared to an Alternating Current. DC
current is regularly used for electronics.


                2.3 HOW DO CIRCUITS WORK                           70
   SAFETY COMPONENTS
What is a Electric Fuse?
Unlike light switches, fuses are safety components of
every major circuit. It prevents damage to electrical
components. The fuse is rated at a specific current rating
until it blows and creates an open course. An electric
fuse has a thin metal coil inside where the current flows.
If there is too much electricity flowing, for example, 30
volts flowing through a fuse rated at 20 volts, it
overheats the coil, and the metal separates, causing the
connection to split. If something like that happens, the
solution is to swap it out with another 20 volts fuse. A
fuse with a higher rating should not be replaced with it.
For example, if a 20-volt electrical appliance is
connected to the circuit and you install a 30-volt fuse,
the electricity flow might be excess. If that happens, the
appliance will get ruined.

         What is a Miniature Circuit Breaker?
                 Miniature circuit breakers, or MCBs, are another safety
                 component in an electric circuit. This works the same
                 way how a fuse works. It has a limitation on the flow of
                 electricity. MCBs can also work like a light switch in the
                 circuit. The only difference is that a light switch won't
                 do anything in case of a current increase. Whenever the
                 current flowing in the MCB is unusually high, it
                 immediately trips the switch causing the connection to
                 cut off. If that happens, we can instantly flip the switch
                 back to the on position and not spend any money on a
                 fuse. It is also very helpful when it comes to doing
                 electrical work. You can instantly cut the power by
                 flipping a light switch without removing any fuses.



71               2.3 HOW DO CIRCUITS WORK
          APPLICATION

Using just batteries, wires, an LED, and a switch,
build both a parallel and series circuit using what
you learned.




        Series                  Parallel


Explain how you build each circuit and
how it works. Which circuit seems to be
more reliable? Which circuit was easier to
build? Which type of circuit seems more
likely to be used in real-life settings?



           2.3 HOW DO CIRCUITS WORK            72
 THOUGHT PROVOKING
In the given pictures below, which object is
   most likely to use alternating current?




What would happen if the electrical current
  constantly reverses during a circuit?

Why is a plastic material used commonly in
  electronics? Especially for exteriors?

              In what cases would people
              pick alternating current over
                 direct current or direct
                current over alternating
                         current?

73        2.3 HOW DO CIRCUITS WORK
             2.4 CIRCUITS
 How do electricity and magnets play a role in our
                      lives?


       Questions of the day
                    Does a magnetic field expire
                    and lose its field?

                    What do you think happens
                    when an electric field overlaps
                    a magnetic field?

                    Is it possible to remove an
                    object's magnetic field?



KEY WORDS
Magnetic
Electric
Field
Circuit
Attraction
Transform
Positive
Negative




                  2.4 CIRCUITS                    74
         APPLICATIONS OF
            CIRCUITS
Circuits in our Daily Lives
Now, you might be wondering, how does a circuit affect us?

                                              Circuits provide every utility
                                              that is around you. For the
                                              simple day-to-day activities
                                              that you or your parents use,
                                              they all use circuits to guide
                                              and     provide     electricity.
                                              Everything is run by a circuit,
                                              from refrigerators to toasters,
                                              to microwaves, to the lights
                                              lighting up our streets at
                                              night.

Everywhere . . .
Without electricity, our lives would be
much different. For example, we would still
be relying on gas and oil as our primary
power source, which leads to more
pollution within Earth's atmosphere.
Without the cleaner alternative of energy
through electricity, we couldn't have made
it this far in the first place!




75                        2.4 CIRCUITS
         APPLICATIONS OF
            CIRCUITS
  Magnets in Nature & their Applications
              There are only a few natural magnets in nature. Although
              they may not seem important, they are responsible for
              many of the magnetic properties found in magnets today.
              Many magnets are usually made as an alloy (a combination
              of raw metals and heat) of these metals, resulting in a
              powerful magnet.


                 Raw Metals                Heat        Strong Magnetic Alloy




Magnets in our Daily Lives
Like circuits, magnets play a big role in our lives.
Much of modern transportation relies on
magnets as motors, which power the wheels on
cars and motorcycles, are made by their
properties. Additionally, the faster train on Earth
right now is the Magent-based bullet train in
Japan. Have you ever experienced going to the
dentist? Well, then you have experienced the
force of a magnet! X-rays that doctors take of
your teeth use magnets to see, well, your teeth!
Much of modern medicine also contains
magnets.



                              2.4 CIRCUITS                           76
   CIRCUITS & MAGNETS:
      RELATIONSHIPS
Their Mutual Connection
Electricity and Magnetism are closely related. They have an
inverse relationship, in which flowing electrons from an electric
field will produce a magnetic field, and spinning magnets can
create an electric current.




Many applications of circuits and magnets use a combination of
both electricity and magnets. For example, a motor uses
electricity (powered by gas or some equivalent) to start itself
and spins magnets really fast to generate electricity for the car
to run on.



77                      2.4 CIRCUITS
   ELECTROMAGNETISM
The Combination
What happens when a magnetic field and an electric field combine?
Well, you get something called electromagnetism. This force is one of
the four fundamental forces of nature, as creates a new sort of field,
titled: the electromagnetic field. The electromagnet force is what binds
atoms together and allows magnets to work. The concept of
electromagnetism was proved by Albert Einstein, as he showed the
relationship between both electric and magnetic forces.


Electromagnetic Spectrum
Electromagnetism also describes the various kinds of
waves in our everyday science. Thanks to a specific
spectrum of electromagnetic waves, we can do
multiple different tasks in our daily lives. These
waves are radio waves and microwaves to X-rays and
gamma rays.
The visible light spectrum is just a tiny part of the electromagnetic
spectrum, and it contains the wavelengths for all the colors visible to the
human eye. The spectrum works by sorting the different waves by
frequency, or number of wave cycles per second, with radio waves having
the lowest frequency, the longest wave length, and gamma rays having
the highest frequency, the shortest wavelength. This is why a sunset is
red and orange, as those colors can disperse in the sky easier due to their
longer wavelengths, which allow them to travel longer distances.




Electromagnetism plays a crucial role in technology. It creates many
different fields of jobs, including electrical engineering, production,
electronic    communication,     and   light/heat/sound     distribution.
Electromagnetism is used in radio communication, electronics, the
internet, speakers, and so much more!



                            2.4 CIRCUITS                            78
          APPLICATION

Explain how magnetic force plays a major role in
electric motors.




How did old Fashion Compasses work to get
sailors to their destinations in the olden days?




79                2.4 CIRCUITS
 THOUGHT PROVOKING

           Which is stronger?




A naturally found magnet or a magnet created
           through artificial means?



Is an electromagnet or a magnet stronger?




                2.4 CIRCUITS             80
 2.5 ELECTROMAGNETS
 What are electromagnets and how are they made?


         Questions of the day
                       How do magnets work?

                       What metals have magnetic
                       properties?

                       What uses of magnets can be
                       seen in our everyday lives?

                       Magnets have two sides. One
                       is North. What is the other
                       called?




KEY WORDS
Magnet
Electric
Compass
Iron
Electromagnet
Nickel
Copper
Wire
Field




81              2.5 ELECTROMAGNETS
           HISTORY OF THE
              COMPASS
                                  Compass
                       By definition, a compass is a magnet that
                       always points north. Compasses are used to
                       help people figure out which direction is
                       north which helps them navigate. Sailors and
                       hikers commonly use compasses. Compasses
                       were said invented in Ancient China around
                       1000 years ago, but the Vikings used a very
A compass always       old type of compass almost 3000 years ago!
   points north



Other early tech with magnets
You've learned about the compass,
one of the earliest techs that used
magnets. Another example of early
magnetic tech is the cow magnet. A
cow magnet was used to stop metal
that a cow could accidentally eat
from traveling farther inside the cow,
which caused more damage.



Fun Fact: A cow magnet actually goes inside the cow! It stops
metals from traveling farther inside the cow by using its magnetic
forces, which attract the metal to the magnet.




                   2.5 ELECTROMAGNETS                           82
 HOW COMPASS WORKS




Ever wondered how a compass knows which way is North? Well, it's all
thanks to the Earth itself! You see, the Earth is like this huge magnet. It
has a North pole and a South pole, just like the magnets you might have
played with.
A compass is designed with a special needle or magnetized bar that can
move freely. One end of the needle is attracted to the North Pole, while
the other end is pulled towards the South Pole. When you hold the
compass flat, the needle automatically lines up in a North-South
direction. This clever alignment allows us to figure out which way is
North.                                        This orange layer is what gives
                                               Earth its magnetic properties

Earth's Magnetic North Pole
Earth's actual north pole and magnetic
north pole are not precisely the same.
They are about 1200 miles apart. That
number might seem significant, but the
Earth itself is so huge that it barely makes
a difference. Earth's magnetic north pole
changes! The magnetic properties come
from the iron core, which slowly rotates.
In 250 million years, the magnetic north
pole will be on the South pole!


83                    2.5 ELECTROMAGNETS
      ELECTROMAGNETS:
       WHAT ARE THEY?
An electromagnet is a magnet made out
of electricity. A simple electromagnet
consists of a wire wrapped around a
metal pole. The great thing about an
electromagnet is that you can change
how strong you want it to be. The image
on the right is a simple electromagnet;
the battery sends electricity into the
wire, which then magnetizes the nail,
making it a magnet. All electromagnets
have coils that pass electricity. As these
coils turn, the electric current passing
through the coils works to form a
magnetic field. It is this magnetic field
that creates the magnetic abilities of an
electromagnet.
                             In Real Life
                             Have you ever wondered how your
                             headphones work? How about motors,
                             generators, or an electric doorbell? They all
                             use electromagnets! Everyday appliances
                             that you use contain electromagnets. On
                             the left is a headphone. Headphones are
                             very common, especially among teenagers.
                             Some other common household appliances
                             that    use   electromagnets     are   fans,
                             refrigerators, and microwaves ovens.
                             Clearly, electromagnets play a significant
                             role in and around our house. Learning
                             about these things can help us right now
                             and in the future.



                     2.5 ELECTROMAGNETS                              84
      ELECTROMAGNETS:
          EXAMPLES
Common items that use                           The electromagnet
electromagnets:                                  in the microwave
   Vacuum Cleaners
   Refrigerators
   blenders
   driers
   Microwaves
   Dish washers
Without electromagnets,
our lives would be way
harder!
Microwaves, like many other machines, utilize electromagnets in their
operation. Electromagnets are created by passing an electric current
through a wire coil, generating a magnetic field. This magnetic field can
be manipulated to achieve specific functions within the microwave.
In a microwave, the main component that employs an electromagnet is
the magnetron. The magnetron is responsible for generating the
microwaves that heat up food. Inside the magnetron, there is a vacuum
tube that houses a filament, a series of resonant cavities, and a
magnetron antenna.
When the microwave is turned on, an electrical current is supplied to
the filament, causing it to heat up and release electrons. These
electrons are accelerated by high voltage and move toward the
resonant cavities. As the electrons move through the cavities, they
interact with the magnetic field generated by the electromagnet.



85                  2.5 ELECTROMAGNETS
        BUILDING AN
      ELECTROMAGNET
Materials:
   wire
   any battery
   iron nail
   any magnetic objects


Directions:
 1. Wrap the wire around the
    nail, as many times as
    you'd like.
 2. Tape one end of the wire
    to the positive side of the
    battery, and the other end
    to the negative side.
 3. You have an
    electromagnet! Try using
    it to pick up any magnetic
    objects around your
    house, like iron fillings or
    an actual magnet.


               2.5 ELECTROMAGNETS   86
    BUILDING A COMPASS

     THE HIKER'S DILEMMA
                                John was hiking through the woods
                                and got lost. He had a piece of cork,
                                a bowl, a bottle of water, a magnet,
                                and a needle in his bag. Help him
                                build a magnet! Make sure to have
                                adult supervision in this activity!

                          Directions:
Step 1: Take the cork and cut off
1/4 an inch of the cork to make a
            cork disk

                                 Step 2: Magnetize the needle by
                                  rubbing it on the magnet. This
                                 temporarily transfers magnetic
                                    properties to the needle.


 Step 3: Push the needle through
         the cork like this


                                     Step 4: Pour the water in the
                                     bowl and place the cork with
                                      the needle inside the bowl
    Your compass is finished! John thanks you for helping him build a
                                compass!


87                  2.5 ELECTROMAGNETS
 THOUGHT PROVOKING

What causes Earth's
  Magnetic pole to
 change? (Hint: the
answer lies in one of
   Earth's layers)


                  Give an example of
                   a household item
                      that uses an
                    electromagnet.

  Explain how the
object works using
the electromagnet.
  Look online for
       help!

          2.5 ELECTROMAGNETS      88
 2.6 PENNY BATTERIES
     What makes a penny such a good battery?


Questions of the day
                    What is electricity and how is
                    it created?

                    How does a penny conduct
                    electricity?

                    How can you tell if a battery
                    is "dead" or still has some
                    charge left in it?




KEY WORDS
Battery
Zinc
Copper
Electricity
Power
Energy
Vinegar
Voltmeter
Scissors




89            2.6 PENNY BATTERIES
         ELECTRICITY AND
            BATTERIES
What is Electricity?
Electricity is a form of energy resulting from the
movement of charged particles, such as electrons
or ions. It is generated by various means, including
chemical reactions, electromagnetism, and
nuclear reactions. Electricity is used to power a
wide range of devices and systems, from small
electronic devices such as smartphones and
computers to large power grids that supply
electricity to cities and industries. Electricity is a
fundamental part of modern life and is used for
lighting,       heating,     transportation,      and
communication, as well as powering many other
applications.

What are Batteries?
A battery is a device that converts stored chemical energy into
electrical energy. Batteries are composed of one or more
electrochemical cells consisting of two electrodes (an anode and a
cathode) separated by an electrolyte. The chemical reactions that
occur within the battery cause electrons to flow through an external
circuit, producing an electrical current that can be used to power
various devices. Batteries power a wide range of devices that we use
daily, including smartphones, laptops, tablets, remote controls,
flashlights, and toys. They are also used in larger items such as cars,
boats, and airplanes and are essential for powering portable and
wireless devices. Without batteries, many of our daily activities would
be much more challenging and inefficient.



                       2.6 PENNY BATTERIES                       90
       WHAT IS A PENNY
         BATTERY?
Penny Batteries
Penny batteries, also known as voltaic cells,
are a type of battery that can be made at
home using simple materials like copper
coins, zinc nails, and vinegar. They are called
penny batteries because they can be made by
                                                 An electric current is
using pennies as one of the electrodes, an
                                                 produced through the
electrical conductor used to contact the
                                                   movement of ions
nonmetallic part of a circuit. The concept of
                                                through an electrolyte,
voltaic cells dates back to the late 18th
                                                 a conducting medium
century when famous Italian physicist
                                                     that conducts
Alessandro Volta discovered that two
                                                electricity through the
different metals separated by an electrolyte       movement of ions
(a conducting medium that conducts present in the medium.
electricity through the movement of ions
present in the medium) could produce an
electric current.



Simple Science
A penny battery uses two different kinds of
metal, like a copper penny and a zinc nail, and
a special liquid called an electrolyte made
from vinegar and salt. When the metals and
the electrolyte are put together correctly, a
chemical reaction occurs, generating a tiny
amount of electricity.




91                  2.6 PENNY BATTERIES
        CAPABILITIES AND
            SAFETY
Uses of a Penny Battery
Although penny batteries are not very powerful, they can still be used
to power small electronic devices or science experiments that require
low levels of electricity. One example of a device that penny batteries
can power is an LED light. By connecting several penny batteries in a
series, it is possible to create a circuit that will light up an LED, which
can be used as a small emergency source of light. Another example of
a device that can be powered by penny batteries is a small motor or
generator. By connecting a penny battery to a simple motor made
from a magnet and a coil of wire, it is possible to create a simple
electric motor that can be used to power a toy or other small devices.



Proper Safety Measures
When working with batteries and electricity, it's essential to be aware
of safety concerns such as electrical shocks, chemical burns, fires,
and explosions. To mitigate these risks, wear appropriate protective
equipment, such as full-sleeved clothing, gloves, and protective
glasses. Also, please store batteries in a cool, dry place. Follow the
proper instructions when using and charging batteries, and turn off
the power supply before working on electrical equipment. Keep a fire
extinguisher and first aid kit on hand in case of a fire, and educate
yourself on how to respond quickly and safely if an accident occurs.




                       2.6 PENNY BATTERIES                          92
        BUILDING A PENNY
            BATTERY
                         Materials
        Five pennies (after 1982 pennies), mat board, a
        piece of 100-grit sandpaper, salt, wires, water,
                  vinegar, and a red LED light


                       Instructions
1. Make a saturated salt water solution by
mixing 2 tablespoons of salt in a glass of
water until the salt no longer dissolves.
Then, add a spoon of vinegar to the
solution. While doing so, cut the mat
board into 4 separate 1/2-inch squares.


                 2. Soak the mat board pieces in the salt-and-
                 vinegar solution. Once the pieces are thoroughly
                 wet, take them out and place them on a paper
                 towel so they are still damp but not dripping. Use
                 sandpaper to remove the copper from one side of
                 each of the four pennies, and leave the fifth penny
                 intact. Sand until you see zinc (a shiny silver color)
                 covering the entire face of the coin. When you're
                 done, the sanded coins should have a bronze-
                 colored copper side and a silver-colored zinc side.




93                  2.6 PENNY BATTERIES
        BUILDING A PENNY
            BATTERY
3. Take one of your sanded pennies with the
zinc side facing up (copper side down), and
place a damp piece of mat board on it. Then
repeat the process, stacking the pennies on
top of each other in the appropriate order
(zinc side facing up) with a damp 1/2-inch
piece of mat board in between each penny.
Finally, place the unsanded penny at the
very top.



                               4. Lastly,    connect the LED to the
                               penny by      placing one wire at the
                               bottom of     the stack and one at the
                               top. Your      LED should be shining
                               bright red!




How does this work?
Batteries convert chemical energy into electrical energy using two
metal electrodes and an electrolyte. Pennies made after 1982 have zinc
cores that can create a zinc electrode when sanded. By stacking
pennies and matboards soaked in salty vinegar water, you can create a
voltaic pile or battery, generating over 0.6 volts per cell. A stack of
three cells is enough to power a red LED, which is visible throughout
this experiment.




                     2.6 PENNY BATTERIES                          94
     APPLICATION

              Suppose you live in a
             rural area with limited
              access to electricity.
               How could you use
               penny batteries to
            power a small electronic
             device like a flashlight
                    or radio?

What materials would you use
 to build the penny battery?




95     2.6 PENNY BATTERIES
 THOUGHT PROVOKING
How can the principles behind the penny battery
    be applied to other fields of science or
                 engineering?




  For example, can batteries be used to store
 renewable energy or power electric vehicles?


                 What are the environmental
              impacts of batteries, and how can
               we minimize the negative effects
              of their production and disposal?



    What are some historically
famous or new inventions where
 batteries have played a critical
  role in technology or society?


              2.6 PENNY BATTERIES           96
Page Intentionally left blank
OBJECTS IN
 MOTION




   CHECK OUT
  OUR YOUTUBE
   CHANNEL!
 3.1 NEWTONS LAWS
What are Newtons Laws and how do they
       appear in today's society

            Questions of the Day
                      Who is Isaac Newton?


                      Why do your feet hurt after you
                      jump from a height?


                      How do the mass and acceleration
                      of an object affect the force of the
                      object?




 Key words
 Gravity
 Friction
 Force
 Acceleration
 Mass
 Weight
 Rest
 Normal




98              3.1 NEWTONS LAWS
         ISAAC NEWTON

                              Isaac Newton, born in England in
                              1643, is famous for his contributions
                              to the field of physics. Newton lived
                              during the Scientific Revolution, a
                              period when our understanding of
                              nature     began    to    shift   from
                              preconceived religious ideas to a basis
                              in     observations     and     logical
                              interpretations    of    the     world.
                              Enlightened by this new approach to
                              science, Isaac Newton studied a range
                              of concepts, from fundamental math to
                              astronomy.

Discovery of Gravity and Laws
You might already be familiar with Isaac Newton's discovery of
gravity. The story goes that after being struck on the head by a
falling apple, Newton realized that there was an invisible force
acting on the apple, causing it to fall to Earth. He referred to this
force as gravity, a term derived from the Latin word for "heavy."
But as you know from the first unit, the weight of an object
doesn't effect how much gravity the object experiences.




                   3.1 NEWTONS LAWS                                99
          THE FIRST LAW
An object at rest stays at rest, and an object in motion
 will stay in motion unless acted upon by a net force.
        Before:                                    After:


  Important Definitions:
  Rest: When an object is not moving and has no acceleration.
  Net Force: This is the combination of all forces acting on an
  object. When the net force is zero, the object is considered to be
  either not moving or at rest.


  Imagine This!
After a very busy day at school, you realize that you have left your
favorite pencil on your desk in class. When you arrive at school the next
day, you find the pencil exactly where you left it. According to
Newton's First Law, this is because no net force was exerted on the
object; therefore, the object remained in a state of rest, or in other
words, did not move.

The second part of the law, which states that an object in motion will
stay in motion, is somewhat more difficult to grasp because, on Earth,
forces are always at play. When we roll a ball, it eventually stops
moving due to friction. However, if no forces were acting on the ball, it
would roll indefinitely. Imagine an environment devoid of forces, or
visualize an extremely slippery surface that never slows you down -
consider, for example, a golf ball in space.



100                  3.1 NEWTONS LAWS
      THE SECOND LAW
  Newton's Second Law: Force = Mass * Acceleration

Important Definitions
Mass: the ability of an object to resist a change in motion or the
amount of matter (stuff) in an object and is measured in
kilograms (kg).
Acceleration: change in speed over time and is measured in
meters per second squared ( )


                      Sheldon's Mass: 75 kg

                      Sheldon's Acceleration: 2

                      What is Sheldon's Force?
                      Wrong Answer: 150
                      Correct Answer: 150 Newtons (N) -
                      remember to use proper units for force


How can we make Sheldon more powerful
or have a greater force? Well, we have two
options. We can either increase his mass or
we can train him to accelerate faster. Let's
say we decide to do the second option.
Now, Sheldon has a new acceleration of 3

Since his acceleration has increased,
Sheldon's force also increases by the same
factor. After doing the calculations, his      225N
force comes out to be 225 N!




                   3.1 NEWTONS LAWS                              101
          THE THIRD LAW
       For every action force, there is an equal and
                 opposite reaction force.
Newton's Third Law states that when two objects collide or touch, the
forces exerted on each object are equal and opposite. For example,
when you high-five your friend, both hands will experience the same
force, but in opposite directions. One hand will experience a force,
while the other hand will experience an equal and opposite force. If
you experienced a force of 100N to the right, your friend would
experience the same 100N force, but to the left.



    100N                  100N

Let's go back to the example of the
pencil that you left on your desk.
We concluded that the pencil did
not move because there was not a
net force on the pencil. But what
about gravity? Doesn't that create
a force on the pencil?
Indeed, gravity does exert a force on the pencil. However, what we
haven't accounted for is the equal and opposite reaction between the
pencil and the table. The weight of the pencil on the table is
counteracted by a force from the table on the pencil, known as the
normal force, which comes into play when two objects are in contact
with one another. Normal forces act perpendicular (at 90 degrees) to
the contact surface between the two objects. Since the normal force
and the weight of the pencil are equal and opposite, they cancel each
other out, resulting in a net force of 0. This means the pencil remains at
rest.


102                  3.1 NEWTONS LAWS
      PENNY DROP LAB
    Essential Question: How does varying the applied
  force/acceleration on a system change the outcome
       when friction is present in the experiment.
Procedure:
1. Set a cup on a flat surface
2. Put an index card over the
cup

3. Put a penny on top of the                          Slow
index card
                                                       Pull
4. Slowly pull the index card
away from the cup in a straight
line and observe what happens
to the penny

5. Flick the index card away
from the cup (parallel to the
top of the cup) and observe
what happens to the penny

6. Repeat until you answer:
                                                    Fast
Why did the pennies move as                         Pull
 they did in both situations?
    Intended Outcome: In the first situation, the penny
    moved with the index card. In the second, the penny
                     fell into the cup.


                   3.1 NEWTONS LAWS                       103
THOUGHT PROVOKING

In real life, objects that hit projectiles have recoil,
backward propulsion that occurs in response to a
hit. Consider a baseball bat that hits a baseball
with a mass of 0.2 kilograms with an acceleration
of 400 m/s^2.




1. What law explains why the batter experiences
   recoil?
2. What is the force of baseball in Newton? (hint:
   consider units)
3. What modifications can be made to the bat, the
   ball, and/or the surrounding environment to
   ensure less recoil and therefore, make the bat
   more controllable for new players?



104            3.1 NEWTONS LAWS
3.2 TYPES OF ENERGY

What are the different types of energy in
              our world?

Questions of the day
                Why is it that a bullet being fired
                would result in more energy
                being released than a person
                running?



 What is one of the reasons that
 an airplane can fly so high?




 Key words
 Energy
 Potential
 Kinetic
 Acceleration
 Elastic
 Chemical
 Velocity
 Weight




                3.2 TYPES OF ENERGY                   105
      WHAT IS ENERGY?
    Energy                 By definition, energy is the capacity to do
                           work. It exists in various forms, such as kinetic
                           energy, potential energy, and elastic energy.
                           Energy is constantly transitioning from one
                           form to another. Just as mass can be measured
                           in kilograms and height in inches, energy can
                           be measured in units called Joules (J) or
                           Kilojoules (kJ). Energy cannot be created or
                           destroyed, and every object with mass
Since Sheldon here has     possesses energy.
  mass, he has energy


 Important Definitions
                                                         This rubber band
    Energy - the ability to do work                        has a spring
    Velocity - how fast an object is                     constant of 0.81

    traveling in a given direction
    Gravity Constant - the downward
    acceleration of gravity on Earth
    (always 9.81)
    Spring Constant - a measure of how
    stiff a spring (e.g. rubber band) is
    Acceleration - the rate at which
    velocity changes

                                                             The acceleration
                                                             of gravity pulling
                        Sheldon is                           Sheldon down is
                       running at a                          9.81 meters per
                      velocity of 23                         second squared
                     m/s to the right




106                      3.2 TYPES OF ENERGY
      KINETIC ENERGY
 Kinetic energy can be defined as the energy an object possesses
 due to its motion, and it varies based on the object's mass. For
 example, a runner possesses kinetic energy because they are in
 motion. The runner's kinetic energy can change depending on
 their mass and the speed at which they are running.




 Kinetic Energy                      Mass      Velocity squared
                                                  (this means

Example:
                                            velocity times velocity)


                        Martha is walking. As she has a definite
                        body weight and some velocity (walking
                        speed) she has kinetic energy. If her mass
                        was 100 kilograms and her velocity was 25
                        meters per second left, calculate the
                        kinetic energy of Martha using the equation
                        for kinetic energy.


                        She hears someone calling behind her and
                        quickly snaps around and starts to walk
                        towards them. What is the change in
                        kinetic energy if she starts walking
                        backward at the same speed?




                  3.2 TYPES OF ENERGY                         107
  POTENTIAL ENERGY
Potential energy can be defined as the energy stored in an object
based on its position and mass. It is often understood as the energy
that can be converted into another form. For example, when a
runner begins to run, their potential energy is converted into kinetic
energy. Similarly, when you knock a book off a desk, its potential
energy is converted into kinetic energy.




Potential Energy           Mass         Gravity    Object's
                                        constant    height
                                      (9.81 m/s^2)
Sheldon and Jenna are standing on a hill and, therefore, possess
potential energy. However, because Sheldon is standing at a
higher elevation than Jenna, he has more potential energy.


 Example:                    If Sheldon is standing 100 meters high
                             off the ground, and Jenna is standing
                             50 meters above the ground, and both
                             of them have a mass of 50 kilograms,
                             what's the difference in potential
                             energy between both of them?




108               3.2 TYPES OF ENERGY
       ELASTIC ENERGY
Elastic energy, also known as spring potential energy, can be defined
as the energy stored in an object when it is being stretched or
compressed. For instance, a stretched rubber band possesses elastic
energy. The amount of elastic energy depends on the spring constant,
which measures the stiffness of the object, and the horizontal
distance that the object travels when stretched.




                             Spring            Horizontal distance
Elastic Energy                                traveled squared (this
                            Constant
                                               means the horizontal
                                             distance traveled times
Example:                                              itself)

                     Bouncy balls and stretched rubber band
                     possess elastic energy because it has moved a
                     distance from its original position around one
                     thumb. This is due to the inherent spring
                     constant within rubber bands.
                     If the rubber band is stretched 0.85 meters
                     and has a spring constant of 0.6, what is the
                     elastic energy of the rubber band?

                     Challenge question: If a rubber band with a
                     spring constant of 0.85 holds energy of 57 J
                     when stretched, how far has it been
                     stretched?


                   3.2 TYPES OF ENERGY                         109
 CHANGES IN ENERGY
While energy cannot be created or destroyed, it can be transformed
into another type of energy. For instance, potential energy can be
converted into kinetic energy and kinetic energy can be reverted
back to potential energy. However, the pivotal question is, when
does this transition occur?


Potential to Kinetic & Kinetic to Potential
When an object at rest starts
moving, its potential energy is
converted into kinetic energy.
In   the    example      below,
Sheldon's potential energy is
converted into kinetic energy
once    he   starts    running.
Conversely, his kinetic energy
is   converted     back    into
potential energy when he
stops.

Elastic to Kinetic & Kinetic to Potential
When a spring (e.g. rubber band) is launched, its elastic energy is
converted into kinetic energy, and its kinetic energy is converted into
potential energy once it hits the ground.




110                3.2 TYPES OF ENERGY
              APPLICATION
      Experiment#1:                     Experiment#2:
      Elastic Energy                    Kinetic Energy
1. Take any rubber band               1. Stand on a scale (mass)
2. Extend it back a bit (2-3 cm)      2. Walk exactly 30 ft and have
3. Launch it                            someone time you
4. Record how far it lands            3. Repeat steps 1-2 while
5. Repeat steps 1-3 except              jogging
  extend it as far back as you can    4. Repeat steps 1-2 while
  this time                             sprinting




                                                                   30 ft


                                Questions?
 1.    Did the rubber band travel       1.    What was your kinetic
      more distance when extended              energy each time?
      farther back or extended back     2.     How did your kinetic
               only a little?                energy change when you
 2. Why do you think this is? (You             walked, jogged, and
      need to mention formula(s) in                 sprinted?
               your answer).



                   3.2 TYPES OF ENERGY                             111
THOUGHT PROVOKING

                       If Sheldon, who has a
                       weight of 28.0 N, jumps
                       off of a big spaceship,
                       10,000 meters high onto
                       an undiscovered planet
                       and falls at a constant
                       speed of 28.0 m/s, what is
                       his potential energy as he
                       falls on a clifftop 1 minute
                       later?




 Is it possible for
 potential energy to
 be negative? If so,
 when? If not, why
 not?



112           3.2 TYPES OF ENERGY
   3.3 SYSTEMS AND
      REFERENCES
     What is the importance of
 understanding the scope of motion?

Questions of the day
                        Is it possible to have a
                        negative acceleration but still
                        have a positive velocity? If
                        so, how?


                        Why do you feel like you are not
                        in motion when you are in a
                        plane?




Key words
 Reference
 System
 View
 Position
 Orientation
 Open
 Closed
 External
 Relative



               3.3 SYSTEMS AND REFERENCES          113
                  SYSTEMS
A system can be defined as a collection of objects. Let's consider
the pencil box that you take to school. If I were to ask you what
objects the pencil box system contains, you would list items like
an eraser and a pencil. Now, what if I asked you to name objects
within a school system? Well, things such as teachers, students,
chairs, classrooms, and whiteboards are all part of a school, and
therefore, belong to the school system. Now, what if I asked you
about an Earth system? An Earth system would encompass
absolutely everything that exists on Earth, including forces and
atoms! Why do we make the effort
                                             Earth System
to identify or refer to clusters of
objects     as    systems?    Well,
recognizing a system simplifies
the      problem       at    hand.
Understanding the type of system
you are working with allows for
easier comprehension of every
variable    within   that  system,
including forces, energy, and the
individual items themselves.

            Car System             You       have      first-hand
                                   experiences    with   systems
                                   every day. For example, when
                                   you are in a car, you don't
                                   feel its movement. This is
                                   because you are a part of the
                                   car's system and the car is
                                   traveling the same speed as
                                   you are.




114 3.3 SYSTEMS AND REFERENCES
                     SYSTEMS
Look at the unknown system on the
right. The objects belonging to the
                                              Parts of the System
system are a pencil box and a desk. For
an easier understanding, I will refer to
the system as a box-desk system. Now I
need you to refer to prior knowledge.
What forces are present in the system?
The two obvious ones would be a gravity
                                               Whole System
force and a normal force exerted on the
box by the table. While there is probably
a frictional force present, let's disregard
that for now. Notice that none of the
objects within the system are moving.
This means that none of the objects are
accelerating   and    so   according    to
Newton's second law (F=ma), there is a
net force of 0 within the system as there
is no acceleration or movement.


SELF-REFLECTION ACTIVITY
Think of a game you have played recently. Name the system. Think
about what kind of characters or avatars are available. What is the
game's currency?

Example Answer: The game I am thinking of is called Fortnite Battle
Royale and I will name the system the "Tilted Tower system", named
after one of the locations in the game. The system contains many
skyscrapers and the location is known for having a building that gets
destroyed by a meteor every few months. This location has a lot of
moving characters trying to beat each other and get the win.



                  3.3 SYSTEMS AND REFERENCES                  115
  TYPES OF SYSTEMS
 CLOSED SYSTEMS
 Closed systems are systems in which matter is contained and not
 allowed to exit the system. The universe serves as an example of a
 closed system because matter cannot leave or enter it. In physics,
 a closed system can also be defined as a system where external
 forces are not considered to act on an object, although energy
 exchange with the surroundings is permitted.


                             Similar to the
                           prisoner or a cup
                           of coffee in a cup,
                          the matter is jailed
                            within a closed
                          system and cannot
                                escape.

 OPEN SYSTEMS
 Open systems, as the name suggests, allow the transfer of
 various elements through them. Your pencil box serves as an
 example of an open system because it is frequently opened
 and objects are placed into or taken out from it. In physics, an
 open system can also be defined as a system where external
 forces are present. As these external forces are exerted, they
 can cause the system to lose energy.


                            The stovetop is an example of an open
                            system because matter escapes into
                            the atmosphere in the form of carbon
                            monoxide.




116 3.3 SYSTEMS AND REFERENCES
               REFERENCES

                         References
                         Reference is a strange concept to grasp.
                         Whether or not you know what the term
                         means, you probably already have a loose
                         idea of it. References establish some sort of
                         relationship between objects. For example,
                         setting my classmates as a reference, I sit 5
                         feet away from them in school. Easy right? In
                         physics, however, relativity becomes more
                         than a 2-dimensional concept. In physics,
                         references describe the motion, orientation, or
                         position of an object in regard to other(s).


Train vs Car Reference
Let's examine the visual on the right.
A car and a train are moving                    10 m/s
alongside each other but in different
directions. First, let's consider the
car's motion as our reference. In this
reference frame, the train is moving
at 40 m/s, but in the opposite
direction. If the car were not
moving, it would appear that the
train is moving at 30 m/s relative to               30 m/s
our assumed reference. However, if
the car were moving at 10 m/s in the
same direction as the train, it would
appear to the car that the train is
moving at 20 m/s, as that is the
difference in their speeds.


                  3.3 SYSTEMS AND REFERENCES                      117
 REFERENCES (CONT.)

Directional References
The first step to solving any physics problem is choosing a
reference, which is how you look at something. In other words,
this means identifying 1. the direction an object is traveling
and 2. whether that direction will be a positive or negative
direction. Consider gravity for example: some people say that
gravity is a negative value because it goes downwards while
others maintain that it is a positive value. This is because they
use the opposite reference that uses the "up" direction as the
positive direction. Sometimes calculations with an opposite
reference tend to be easier as positive numbers are more
calculation friendly.
                                   The coordinate axis on the
                                   left is known as the "standard
                                   reference." In the standard
                                   reference,     the     positive
                                   direction is considered to be
                                   up and right, while the
                                   negative direction is down
                                   and left. Following this
                                   reference, gravity is regarded
                                   as a negative value in
                                   calculations because it always
                                   acts downward.




118 3.3 SYSTEMS AND REFERENCES
           APPLICATION

A spring with a mass
attached to it is hanging off
a ceiling. It begins moving
up     and     down     after
someone pulled down on
the mass and lets the
spring go. Is the system
now open or closed? Was it
ever open or closed?




Sun




                                Planet     A,   a    newly-
                                discovered planet, is found
                                to be the farthest planet
                 Planet A
                                from the Sun. Is Planet A
                                considered an open system
                                or a closed system? Why?




              3.3 SYSTEMS AND REFERENCES             119
THOUGHT PROVOKING

 A car is moving at 50 m/s in a straight line around
 the circumference of the Earth. Describe what
 reference is used to arrive at this number and
 label it on the system drawn below.




                            Label all the forces and
   B




                            their directions of the
        A




                            system consisting of
                            Object A and Object B.




120 3.3 SYSTEMS AND REFERENCES
      3.4 MACHINES
   What are machines and what are the
        mechanics behind them?

Questions of the day
                  How is an automobile able to
                  move with just a press on the
                  accelerator and turn using a
                  steering wheel? (how do the
                  engine   and   parts   of  an
                  automobile work together)

                  Why do you get tired more quickly
                  running than biking even though
                  your legs are propelling you in both
                  scenarios?




KEY WORDS
Lever
Machine
Momentum
Rotation
Torque
Propel
Steering
Engine
Wedge



             3.4 MACHINES                       121
               WHAT ARE
               MACHINES?
By definition, machines are physical systems or devices that use
power to apply force and control movement to an object. There
are two main categories of machines, automated and human-
controlled.

Human Controlled Machines
Human-controlled machines require human interactions and
labor in order to work. This is seen in machines such as the lever,
a steering wheel, or machines that manufacture parts.


                   A wheelbarrow is an example of a human-
                   powered machine as it requires physical force
                   and labor to operate and move.


                   A mop is another example of a human-
                   powered machine as in order for it to clean a
                   surface you need to apply force to it.



Automated Machines
There are also automated machines that do not
require human interaction and are completely
independent. These machines typically utilize
sensors and computer software, including
machine learning algorithms, which make them
more accurate and precise compared to human-
operated machines. In the real world, this
technology is commonly found in engines and
motors that power various vehicles and objects,
such as automobiles and lawnmowers.



122                    3.4 MACHINES
 TYPES OF MACHINES
What is a Simple Machine?
Simple machines are mechanical devices that help apply a force to
modify motion and perform work


The Big Six of Simple Machines:


 Inclined plane             Wheel and axle               Lever




       Wedge                    Screw                    Pulley



Why Use Machines?
Efficiency! The utilization of machines greatly simplifies and
expedites tasks, often enhancing precision as well. For instance,
machines enable swift transportation from one place to another,
thanks to motors, engines, and bicycles. Machines can be found
everywhere we look, from fans to cellphones, serving various
purposes. In manufacturing, machines streamline the production of
parts, allowing for precise and large-scale manufacturing,
surpassing the limitations of handmade goods. The possibilities and
applications of machines are endless, but the overarching concept
is their immense benefit in facilitating everyday tasks and
occupations.



                       3.4 MACHINES                            123
   HOW DO MACHINES
        WORK?
Although machines may seem complex, they are often just a bunch
of simple machines working together. Each and every complex
machine is made up of two or more simple machines.




        Screwdriver                             Shovel




                           Backhoe
For example, a screwdriver is just a wheel and axle and a wedge
working together. A backhoe is just a lever and wedge acting
together which allows the complex machine to dig and lift up dirt.
The same is seen with a manual handheld shovel, where a lever and
wedge work together to make it easy to dig out and lift dirt. Although
they seem very complex, machines are essentially just a bunch of
parts working together to make a task easier. There is some physics
behind this, but that is also relatively easy to understand.



124                    3.4 MACHINES
THE PHYSICS BEHIND
     MACHINES
 Momentum and Torque
 Momentum is the amount of strength or force an object gets as it
 moves. Torque is the measure of the force that can cause an object to
 rotate about an axis.




Momentum        Mass    Velocity          Torque       Force    Radius

According to momentum, a rotating object will stay rotating at a
certain angular velocity (the measurement for the spin of an object)
unless acted upon. This is seen especially in machines, in specific car
engines. The engines in cars rotate about an axis, which creates
torque, which is the strength of a vehicle. This torque is what allows a
car to accelerate from 0 to 60 miles per hour in a certain amount of
seconds (the more torque generated, the shorter this acceleration
period will be). This is true in any spinning objects, such as motors and
wheels.




Wheel and Axis                  Car Engine                   Motor



                         3.4 MACHINES                              125
       CONSTRUCTING A
          MACHINE
Constructing a machine is not exceedingly difficult. It primarily
necessitates applying the physics principles mentioned earlier and
assembling a variety of components, including gears, screws, and
building materials. Once you possess a blueprint outlining what you
intend to construct, a plan for its operation, and the necessary parts
for its construction, building the machine itself becomes relatively
straightforward.
                     For example, let's
                       examine the
                      printing press!

   Screw to raise
   and lower the
     press and a
  wooden lever to
   turn the screw




       Wooden
        frame




                    Paper
                               Wooden plate
                                to press the    Leather balls
                                paper along      stuffed with
                                 with paper      wool and ink
                                   holder      supplied the ink
                                                 to the press




126                         3.4 MACHINES
             APPLICATION
             Make a homemade scale!
          Materials: 2 paper cups, a small flat
           piece of wood, and a binder clip

1. Place the surface of the binder
clip on the ground so that the
sides pointing inward are facing
up


2. Place the middle of the piece of
wood on the binder clip (faced
perpendicular to the board,
balancing it




3. Place each cup on the opposite
sides of the wood and fill the cups
up with objects to test the scale




4. When done, it should look
similar to this!




                         3.4 MACHINES             127
THOUGHT PROVOKING
 Which one is a more efficient machine and why?




      A bicycle or a gas fueled car's engine?




                          Why are solar panels so
                       efficient and preferable over
                           burning fossil fuels for
                            harnessing energy?




Why are you able to bounce back
     up on a trampoline?




128              3.4 MACHINES
   3.5 CARS ON A ROLL
        GRAVITY
How do forces change a car's motion?

Questions of the day
How are forces on a car impacted
by terrain and the car's properties?
What happens on a car ride if
you increase the suspension?

How does a car move?

When does a car start to slip?




KEY WORDS
   Roll-force
      Tires
Center-of-gravity
    Stability
  Suspension
     Impact
  Air-pressure
   Roll-over
    Traction



                3.5 CARS ON A ROLL GRAVITY   129
      HOW CAN A CAR
    CHANGE ITS FORCE?
                               Recap on Velocity,
    Gravity
                               Acceleration, and Forces
                               When an object is moving, it is called speed, and
                               when you add a direction to the speed, you call
                               it velocity. An object that is speeding up or
                               slowing down has an acceleration and also has a
                               direction and a number to it. If we have both the
                               acceleration and the mass of the object, we can
                               solve for the force that is being exerted on the
 The apple on the left has a
  force while the apple on
                               object and the direction, by multiplying the
   the right has no force.     acceleration and time.



How Can a Car Change
its Force?
A car can change its force in several
ways. It can slow down due to factors
such as friction, the person driving       The Car is changing its Force
pushing the brakes or going up an              because of turning
incline.                                               NORMAL
It can also speed up due to someone                      FORCE
pressing the gas pedal or a car hitting
it from behind. Because force,
acceleration, and velocity all have a
direction given to
                                        ACCELERATION
them, they will change when the car is
speeding up or slowing down as well.                             GRAVITY



                        3.5 CARS ON A ROLL GRAVITY                       130
WHAT IS ROLL FORCE?

    Types of Motion
Cars can exhibit two types of motion:
translational motion and rolling
                                                 The tennis ball has translational motion
motion. Translational motion occurs
when all points of an object move in
the same direction. For instance, a
rocket     launched         straight    up
demonstrates                  translational
movement. On the other hand, rolling          A rotating tennis ball with translational motion but
                                                                  no roll force
motion, also known as roll force,
occurs when a moving object, such as
a wheel, experiences the effects of
normal force, friction, and gravity.
                                              A rolling tennis ball with translational motion and
However, if the object is not on a                                  roll force
surface, it is not subjected to roll
force, even if it is rotating.
                                                  What is Inertia
                                       Inertia is another factor that
                                       influences roll force. It is calculated
                                       by multiplying the mass of an
                                       object by the square of its radius
                                       from the center, and then
                                       multiplying it by a constant factor
                                       based on the object's shape and
                                       weight distribution. If an object has
                                       greater inertia, it will exhibit higher
                                       resistance to rotational motion. In
                                       other words, the lower the inertia,
Inertia Is also the reason why
                                       the less force is required to initiate
 planets are rotating the sun
                                       movement in the object.


131          3.5 CARS ON A ROLL GRAVITY
            EXPERIMENT

Materials:
   Small Sphere (marble, ping-pong
   ball, etc.)

   2 Surfaces (1 really smooth [ice,
   glass, etc.] and one normal
   surface [cardboard, wood, etc.])

Procedure:
 1. Create a ramp with the material
    and place the sphere at the top.
 2. Observe how the sphere moves
    down the ramp.
 3. Change the starting height of the
    sphere or increase the height of
    the ramp and observe the
    changes in the sphere.
 4. Change the surface and observe
    how the sphere behaves
    differently.
 5. Try to come up with an
    explanation or theory based on
    your observations.


             3.5 CARS ON A ROLL GRAVITY   132
HOW CAN WE CHANGE
   ROLL FORCE?
Roll force can be influenced by various
factors, particularly in the context of a
tire. The shape of the wheel, weight
distribution, and the type of road surface
can   significantly       impact        roll    force.
Alterations in these factors can lead to
substantial    changes          in    the      driver's
control over the car and the overall
experience of the passengers. For instance, if a tire has lower air
                                               pressure, it will experience reduced
                                               roll force. This is also one of the
                                               contributing factors to hydroplaning,
                                               which occurs when a car's tires lose
                                               grip on the road and begin to skid. It is
                                               for this reason that when embarking
                                               on a trip in cold weather, it is advised
                                               to inflate your car's tires with higher
                                               air pressure.

Another        factor           that        can
significantly affect the amount of
roll force in a tire is the number of
spokes it has. The spokes in a tire
contribute         to      its         rigidity,
preventing deformation when the
car is in motion. If a tire has fewer
spokes,      resulting     in        decreased
stiffness,    it   will   require        more
energy to keep the tire rolling.
                                                          Tire Spoke



133            3.5 CARS ON A ROLL GRAVITY
HOW CAN WE CHANGE
   ROLL FORCE?
                      When an object rolls down a ramp,
                      converting potential energy to kinetic
                      energy, it experiences a loss in
ROTATIONAL
                      translational motion. However, due to
  ENERGY
                      some of the energy being converted to
                      rotational motion, the rolling object will
                      move slower than an object with more
                      kinetic energy, even if both objects
                      possess the same total energy. In other
                      words, if we allow a rolling object and a
                      non-rolling object to slide down a ramp,
 TRANSLA-
  TIONAL              the non-rolling object will reach the
  ENERGY              bottom first.

                            Rotational Inertia
                      Inertia is a very large topic and it is very
                      hard to describe it in a few pages.
                      However, I will sum up the main concepts
                      you need to know about how inertia affects
                      roll force. Inertia's equation mass times
                      radius squared if we change one of those
                      factors we can get a different roll force
                      value. This means higher mass or radius of
                      an object means more roll force.

                    Quick Recap
   Roll Force is caused by friction, gravity, and normal force
 Roll Force can be changed in many ways from tire pressure, an
 object's resistance to deformation, to the type of surface the
                     object is being used on
   A greater role force requires more energy for the object to
                           keep moving


            3.5 CARS ON A ROLL GRAVITY                       134
THOUGHT PROVOKING

 What would reach the bottom of the ramp first?
 (same mass and ramp)




                What are some examples of
                common objects that rely on roll
                force to work properly?


Imagine 2 rolling balls. What
would happen to their rolling
speed and how fast they are
moving if they hit each other?



Does speed stay constant when a
car is taking a turn or driving
alongside a curve?




135    3.5 CARS ON A ROLL GRAVITY
            3.6 ROLLER
            COASTERS
 What do builders have to consider to
      garuntee a rider's safety?

Questions of the day
                      Where do you feel the most
                      force on a roller coaster?

                      Why does your roller coaster
                      not stop in the middle?

                      Why do roller coasters not
                      fall off the track when they go
                      upside down?




KEY WORDS
HELIX
BANKED
TURN
HEADCHOPPER
HILL
WAVE
WHIPLASH
LOOP
CREST



            3.6 ROLLER COASTERS                  136
 ROLLER COASTERS IN
      MOTION
Roller coasters are driven by one of the most important forces existing;
gravity. As noticed, roller coasters begin at one of the lowest points on a
ride. The only reason a roller coaster is able to defy gravity and travel
upwards is because of the tension given by the chains and motor.
However, after the chains take the riders to the peak, all the upcoming
hills must be shorter than this one.
                                                                 Peak A

      Peak B


Peak C




This is because roller coasters have no added energy to their system,
preventing them from going higher than they started. As the cart is
pulled up to Peak A, the potential energy of the system increases. As it
travels through the track, the roller coaster experiences friction, taking
its potential energy and turning it into kinetic and thermal energy
(friction). This loss of energy prevents roller coasters from going higher
than they began. As shown, Peak B and Peak C are all lower in height than
Peak A in order to keep the cart in motion. These fundamentals are the
principles that must be kept in mind when building a roller coaster.



                    3.6 ROLLER COASTERS                             137
  ROLLER COASTERS IN
       MOTION
     Why does the amount of energy in a
              system matter?
The amount of energy within a system
determines the distance a roller coaster
can travel. Potential energy, resulting
from gravity, increases with height, and a
greater amount of energy allows for more
transfer to kinetic energy. Energy cannot
be created or destroyed; it can only be
transferred. When there is less energy in a
                                               The longer the track, the more energy
system, it has limited potential for action,         needed to finish the ride.
resulting in fewer peaks and loops on the
roller coaster.

How are Roller Coasters built?
The task of building a roller coaster requires some of the most
knowledgeable architects in the field. This is because while a builder wants
to entertain their customers, they must always consider user safety. In
order to do this, they must understand the topic of physics. This includes
various factors such as friction, normal force, centripetal force, air
resistance, gravity, and many other things. To start off with, an engineer
must understand how high each bump of a roller coaster can be. This is
because after a car is taken to the top, the roller coaster must not stall.
The next bumps cannot be the
same height, or higher, than
the original starting point. This
is because of friction, which
takes away kinetic energy from
the system, decreasing how far
the roller coaster can travel.




138                 3.6 ROLLER COASTERS
      HOW ARE ROLLER
      COASTERS BUILT?
                                   The only exception to this is when extra
                                   energy is added to the cars. This happens
   All forces must be equal
    or else a person would         when there are additional chains bringing
   either sink through their       the cars up or if there are rollers boosting
  seat or fly up into the air.     the cars at a further speed. The next
                                   component to be taken into account is the
                                   G-force applied to the rider. G-force is how
Gravity            Additional
                   centripetal     many times the acceleration of gravity a
                  force at the     person feels. Earth currently accelerates
                    bottom of      everyone at 9.81 m/s, so 2G's would be
                  loops or hills
                                   19.62 m/s. 3G's would be 3 times gravity
                                   and so on. A normal human can only
                                   withstand 9 G's, meaning a person who
                                   weighs 80 kgs would now weigh 720 kgs.
                                   This is, however, the limit to someone's
                                   body, and generally a rollercoaster will
                                   limit their G-force to 5G's. This is made so
                                   even the younger or more frail population
                                   will be able to ride along. The final major
                                   aspect an architect must bear in mind is if a
                                   roller coaster can go through a loop. This
                                   means     defying    gravity   and     therefore
                                   require careful calculations to ensure the
Normal force from the seat         roller   coaster    doesn't    stall   and    roll
  of the roller coaster is
                                   backward.     An      interesting      fact    to
equal to both gravity's and
    centripetal's force            understand however is that mass does not
                                   need to be taken into account when
                                   building a roller coaster.



139                  3.6 ROLLER COASTERS
    BUILDING A MODEL
     ROLLER COASTER
Building a roller coaster may seem complex at first, but the logic
behind it is simple. The main rule to follow is that the highest point
of a roller coaster is the starting point.


       Materials:
                                        1) Begin the roller coaster by
                                        building a structure to hold
       Cardboard                        the beginning.
       Some sort of piping
       (construction                    2) Lay the pipe going down
       paper rolls work)                the structure(after gluing
       Tape or glue                     together enough materials to
                                        make a long enough ramp)

                                        3) add a curved portion at
                                        the bottom

                                        4) Add another support for
                                        the other hill. Experiment
                                        with this height to see how
                                        high it can go.
     The pipe represents the track

                                        5) Lay tracks going up onto
                                        the next support, and add
                                        the remaining part leading
                                        downwards at the end.




                                           The cardboard represents the
                                                  support beams




                  3.6 ROLLER COASTERS                              140
      ELEMENTS OF OUR
      ROLLER COASTER
One important science to roller coasters
is the force acting on each person. At the
top of each peak, or while riding down,
there's a moment of weightlessness that
riders experience. This is because the
roller coaster is moving at the same
speed and same direction as gravity. You
may even be lifted out of your seat if it
wasn't for the restraints.




                             Riders may also experience additional forces
                             acting on them, particularly at the bottom of
                             each dip on the roller coaster. This occurs
                             because, at the bottom, the roller coaster is
                             attempting      to    accelerate     upwards,
                             counteracting the force of gravity. When the
                             force experienced is twice as strong as
                             gravity, it is referred to as 2G, with "G"
                             representing the force of gravity.


The last type of force experienced by
riders is centripetal force. This occurs
when a rider goes inside a loop. This
force is when the rider's acceleration is
towards the center of a loop, and the
most force on a roller coaster is felt
during this loop. This is because gravity,
acceleration, and normal force all act on
a rider at the same time.




141              3.6 ROLLER COASTERS
  APPLYING ROLLER
COASTER KNOWLEDGE
                       Rider's situation
                      A rider gets on the roller coaster
                      but is scared that the ride will
                      stall in the middle and that they
                      wouldn't be able to go over the
                      first hill. Use your knowledge to
                      assure the rider that the ride
                      won't stop and explain why.




Determine if the following rollercoasters
         will work as planned.




Explain how you would feel at the top of
a rollercoaster compared to the bottom.

           3.6 ROLLER COASTERS                   142
THOUGHT PROVOKING
      Which roller coaster would reach
                the end first?




Travels 50 meters upwards at a        Travels up the initial hill at 4
constant rate of 3 m/s, and           m/s for 37 meters, and keeps
accelerates downwards for 50          an average speed of 20 m/s
meters by gravity's acceleration.     for 250 meters

                                      If a roller coaster has loops
                                      and bunny hills, can it still
                                      have the same velocity
                                      throughout the whole roller
                                      coaster? Can it have the same
                                      speed?



How can an engineer make a roller
coaster so that the cars don't need
to be attached to the tracks and
still won't derail through a loop?




Useful Resources (Youtube):

Unit 1 Lesson 1
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tvnCs2YZ-Jo&list=PLhjLi_XV_ESKQTPXPfTOtNMov4xL5XgGJ&index=1&ab_channel=STEMMadeFun
This video explores how gravity and weight work on different planets and 
the relationship between speed, velocity, and direction when going on a curve.

Unit 1 Lesson 2:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6ToBe6uGV4g&list=PLhjLi_XV_ESKQTPXPfTOtNMov4xL5XgGJ&index=2&ab_channel=STEMMadeFun
This video explores why different sports use different types of shoes 
because they require different amounts of friction for optimal performance - Friction. 
Friction is essential for walking, running, and stopping, and without it, movement would be impossible.

Unit 2 Lesson 1:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t_OFzgtjqVI&ab_channel=STEMMadeFun
This video discusses the flow of electricity, how its made, and it's applications to the real world.

Unit 2 Lesson 2:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ekKV-1uj8Yw&ab_channel=STEMMadeFun
This video goes in depth on world of magnets and their applications. 
Magnets are commonly used in various fields, and understanding their properties and characteristics is crucial in harnessing their power.

Unit 2 Lesson 3:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8B6_uY21MSQ&ab_channel=STEMMadeFun
This video goes in depth on circuits and talks about it's applications.

Unit 2 Lesson 5:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5IxkjfIgqAU&ab_channel=STEMMadeFun
This video talks about Electromagnets: The Static Attraction and Shocking Voltage of Electromagnets. 

Unit 2 Lesson 6:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TcrAJNnWQvc&ab_channel=STEMMadeFun
This video covers Penny batteries and their ability to conduct electricity. 
It discuss the concept of electricity, how it is created through electrical generation, and the principles of conservation of energy.

Unit 3 Lesson 1:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H0sM5aKp5V4
This video unviels the Science Behind Motion by talking about Newton's Laws of Motion.

Unit 3 Lesson 2:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cu3c--lmUT8&ab_channel=STEMMadeFun
This video explores the different types of energies such as potential energy and kinetic energy.

